PAGE_TITLE: 
	Is AI the New NAFTA? | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

A new study argues NAFTA may have taken more than it gave. Will AI do the same?
We’ve reached the stage of the AI anxiety cycle where even fictional accounts of dystopian futures can kill hundreds of billions of dollars in market capitalization in the blink of an eye. The actual future is, of course, unknown and unknowable. So while traders and shareholders recover from Substack whiplash, we’d do well to consider a new working paper looking at the last episode of rapid deskilling: NAFTA and its impact on manufacturing workers.
Trading Goods for Lives paints a grim picture of NAFTA’s legacy. The authors find that local labor markets highly exposed to Mexican imports lost jobs and lives. In the 15 years following NAFTA, areas with average exposure experienced a 0.68 percent increase in annual, age-adjusted mortality. These narrow but deep employment losses were associated with elevated mortality across most major causes of death, including infectious diseases, cardiovascular illness, and “deaths of despair.” And it wasn’t just workers—the authors find higher mortality across communities, touching the young, working-age, and retired. In the grim mathematics of economic trade-offs, the cost of lost life-years might offset NAFTA’s estimated gains in real wages, though the authors acknowledge their work doesn’t clearly demonstrate that conclusion.
The study also helps resolve an empirical puzzle: prior evidence suggested that plant closings and trade shocks increase mortality, while recessions actually reduce it. What matters is not whether the economy is contracting but which sector bears the brunt. Declines in manufacturing employment increase mortality; declines in non-manufacturing employment are associated with reduced mortality. The mechanism is not fully established, but may relate to the nature of the jobs themselves.
NAFTA-related manufacturing layoffs were uniquely damaging because they displaced workers from “high-rent” jobs with higher wages, unionization, and longer tenure. When a factory closed, displaced workers were locked out of their standard of living because available jobs couldn’t meet their reserve wages.
Which brings us to today—or perhaps tomorrow.
If these findings are correct, what might they portend for communities affected by AI-driven white-collar displacement? Since the paper’s framework relies on the manufacturing/non-manufacturing distinction, AI-driven job losses would register as non-manufacturing. Under the authors’ pattern, could such a shock, paradoxically, be associated with reduced mortality?
But here’s the deeper question: Is it the sectoral distinction that counts, or the intensity of displacement and the difficulty finding replacement employment of comparable quality? If it’s the latter, AI-induced unemployment might reverse the effect by categorically de-skilling routine knowledge work. Copywriters, junior coders, paralegals, data analysts—the “line workers” of the knowledge economy—might struggle to find jobs because the value of their skills radically declines. Even more senior knowledge workers might face pressure as AI advances into the realm of judgment that, at least theoretically, humans still own.
Before I’m declared a Luddite-catastro-scaremonger, let me say this scenario is unlikely due to capital and other adoption constraints. Further, AI-driven dislocation seems to be everywhere except in the statistics—we see very little employment deterioration directly attributable to AI. Finally, even if knowledge sector jobs decline, these workers have historically shown themselves resistant to long-term joblessness because they have skills that map to related tasks. It may be different this time, but it might be the same, too.
Why bother with an imaginary then? Not for the vicarious thrills of imagined social breakdown but to prevent a replay of the social outcomes that followed rapid deindustrialization. Without re-litigating whether automation or trade is responsible for lost manufacturing jobs, we can agree that the lethargic response to those losses has not served us well. Plans, as Eisenhower said, are useless; but planning is essential. Planning is the duty we owe to the future.
The lesson is not that NAFTA was a bad deal but that we were unprepared for its human costs. AI is poised to deliver a brighter future for our children and grandchildren. To make the journey as smooth as possible, we should be prepared to support displaced workers rather than leaving them feeling stuck, ignored, and angry. Plans for the AI transition will be useless but planning for it is essential.
