PAGE_TITLE: 
	Algorithms, Compute, and the Rise of “Tokenomics” | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

Modern economic history has largely been dominated by the puzzle of human capital. How do growing populations continuously raise skill levels as part of a cycle of rising productivity and living standards?
Harvard economists Claudia Goldin and Lawrence Katz described this as the race between education and technology. When educational attainment keeps pace with technological change, economic output and incomes rise; when technology outruns education, inequality widens. Capital plays its part, too, but in Lincoln’s memorable phrasing, labor precedes and is “superior” to capital. Human effort and ability, cognitive and physical, are the foundation of economic growth while also serving as its chief constraint.
AI may be eroding that constraint. At the moment, this is most apparent among firms closest to the inner circle of the artificial intelligence revolution. In these companies (starting with tech and spreading to other knowledge-intensive industries), “tokens,” units of text processed by generative artificial intelligence, are replacing hours as the basis of understanding business costs. Firms can now purchase intelligence the way they purchase electricity—metered, priced, and scalable to demand.
The knowledge economy’s transformation is further accelerated by the collapsing cost of AI tokens. When OpenAI released GPT-4 in March 2023, the most capable model available, input tokens cost $30 per million and output tokens cost $60 per million. Over 18 months, GPT-4o input tokens fell to $2.50 per million and output tokens to $10 per million, an 80 to 90 percent reduction.
This looks a lot like an accelerated version of Moore’s Law, the doubling of transistor density every two years that has driven down computer hardware costs while improving efficiency. AI costs are falling as companies build smarter models and find ways to serve more customers with the same hardware. The chip industry managed to reduce costs by half every two years. AI services have gotten 10 times cheaper in less time than that, turning average human intelligence into a commodity.
Basic economics predicts what happens next. When commodity prices fall, consumption increases. Enterprise-level AI spending surged sharply in 2025 even as per-token costs continued to fall. Average monthly AI budgets rose 36 percent to roughly $85,000, and the share of organizations spending more than $100,000 per month on AI doubled. For routine cognitive tasks, human labor costs are not competitive. Increasing spending on AI services and infrastructure will feed the development of ever more sophisticated and cheaper systems. When market rattling moments like yesterday’s Citrini report hit, it reflects the growing realization that a challenging transition is underway.
Stanford economist Erik Brynjolfsson argues that AI is now beginning to show up in the macroeconomic data. His analysis suggests US productivity growth roughly doubled in 2025 compared to the prior decade’s average, even as revised employment figures showed far fewer jobs added than initially reported. He interprets this as evidence that the economy is transitioning from AI investment to AI “harvest”.
National economic data is noisy, and last week’s disappointing GDP report says we should be prepared for ongoing uncertainty about the precise effects and timing of AI impacts. Nonetheless, the US economy grew by 2.2 percent last year while job creation remained flat. We’re producing more with relatively less human labor, exactly what we would expect as AI takes hold. Rather than worrying about hiring, training, and credentialing human workers, firms can dial-up cognitive capacity by purchasing it from price-collapsing AI systems. Instead of asking, “Do we have enough engineers?” firms may increasingly say, “Let’s buy some more AI.”
Human labor still matters, but its application is shifting toward tacit knowledge and understanding, something our society has been in short supply of for decades and seems unprepared to remedy. Nonetheless, AI systems need physical plants, energy infrastructure, and semiconductors, all of which still require human workers to build. And even in cognition-heavy sectors, demand for high-end human labor is likely to rise as the need for oversight and governance of AI systems grows.
In other words, the race between education and technology is still on, but the terrain is shifting from “doing” to “judging”. Business spending on tokens is moving up the hierarchy of company budgets while hours-based human labor becomes relatively less important. For businesses and educators, the important shift is adaptation to the needs of an AI-augmented economy in which cognitive effort is increasingly purchased with a token rather than supplied by the hour. Goldin and Katz were right that the race between education and technology determines who prospers. The difference today is that innovation is running faster than anything we have seen before, while our thinking about education and training is still at the starting line.
​
