PAGE_TITLE: 
	Augment or Automate? Two Competing Visions for AI’s Economic Future | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

Sometimes coincidences are just coincidences, and sometimes they actually tell us something important. On Monday, both Anthropic, the developer of the Claude artificial intelligence tool, and OpenAI, the OG AI company, released separate analyses of use patterns for their respective tools. In doing so, they’ve shown a glimpse of how these two companies think about the best path to profitability—or, given how much investor cash both are burning, a financial break-even. The winner of this race (if there is one) will define whether AI serves individual empowerment or becomes a tool for reducing demand for human labor.
OpenAI: The “Facebook” of AI
OpenAI’s data documents the fastest technology adoption curve in history. ChatGPT has now reached 10 percent of the world’s adult population, about 820 million people. This level of global capture took the internet seven years and smartphones five. ChatGPT accomplished it in less than three.
Equally important is how people are using the system. More than 70 percent of its conversations are personal: practical advice, writing assistance, learning support, or simple curiosity. The most common uses—practical guidance, information-seeking, and writing—show ChatGPT functioning more as a cognitive partner rather than as a replacement for human labor.
Looked at this way, ChatGPT is a tool for augmenting human capacity, not automating it. Optimistically, ChatGPT is a way to level-up human ability and insight. Adding 10 IQ points to help everyone navigate their lives better could have profound effects on outcomes across the board. Looked at more critically, ChatGPT has become a supercharged Google search that leaps from finding information to synthesizing and judging it, a clear homogenization of human capacity that might lead to a world of grey-zone AI slop.
Anthropic: A Company’s Best Friend
Anthropic has opted against mass adoption in favor of deep enterprise integration. Internal data show that more than three-quarters of Claude usage reflects automation usage, with businesses utilizing the tool to automate and delegate complete tasks to the model with minimal human oversight.
Claude’s “constitutional AI” and expansive context window is a natural fit for analyzing lengthy documents or reviewing code. Unsurprisingly, then, Claude’s strongest market holds are in wealthy, innovation intensive economies like the US, Israel and Singapore. Domestically, Claude’s strongholds are in technology and information hubs like Silicon Valley, Washington, DC, and…Utah? While ChatGPT follows the people, Claude is following the money, hoping to capitalize on business needs to improve efficiency and productivity. By focusing on complex, high-value work, the company is signaling it believes the future of AI lies not in making everyone more productive, but in automating knowledge work that once required specialized human expertise.
Two Paths to Profitability
These divergent strategies result in different financial trajectories. OpenAI enjoys massive scale, with hundreds of millions of users providing a broad funnel for subscriptions. It generates an overwhelming amount of traffic that is of relatively lower value. OpenAI is betting the real money will flow through licensing its tools to Microsoft, where it can be embedded in Copilot and Office products to generate recurring revenue streams to offset its infrastructure and operating costs.
Anthropic has fewer users but stronger unit economics. Its focus on enterprise use means customers are better positioned to purchase more expensive premium services that can demonstrate strong return-on-investment. OpenAI has a steeper, slower path to profitability. Like the classic Saturday Night Live skit, if every ChatGPT transaction involves a loss, increased volume isn’t the answer. Anthropic may reach break-even sooner, even if OpenAI ultimately commands the larger market. To use an historical analogy, OpenAI is building the transcontinental railway, while Anthropic is building the less glamorous branch lines that connect sectors to national and global systems.
Looking ahead, the divergence is likely to widen. OpenAI will continue to build a mass-market platform, resembling Facebook or TikTok in its attempt to turn ubiquity into revenue. Anthropic, by contrast, seems poised to follow a LinkedIn or Bloomberg trajectory—smaller in scale, but indispensable to businesses seeking to cut headcount and boost profitability.
The Race to Define AI’s Role
Interestingly, these divergent approaches are reflected in corporate messaging. OpenAI has consistently emphasized the potential of AI to create a new world of entrepreneurship and personal empowerment. Anthropic has been one of the leading voices warning about the potential of AI to displace workers, which may turn out to be one of the greatest examples of negative marketing in human history, signaling to managers and shareholders how to boost margins by cutting labor.
Both visions may ultimately prove correct in different markets. OpenAI is betting that AI’s greatest value will be to serve as a cognitive prosthetic for the human race. Anthropic is focused on transforming business operations. The company that best executes its vision may determine whether AI empowers individuals or rewires the economy, changing the trajectory of the future of work.
