PAGE_TITLE: 
	An Own-Goal H1-B Policy | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

The Trump administration’s proposed $100,000 surcharge on H-1B visa applications raises significant questions about the United States’ ability to maintain its competitive edge in science and technology. While the details remain unclear, the surcharge highlights the tension between efforts to protect domestic workers and the need to supplement the US talent pool in advanced scientific and technical fields on which US technological dominance depends.
Estimates of the shortfall in advanced STEM credentials vary but all agree those shortages are significant, tend to compound over time, and that this shortage reduces overall strength in US technological leadership and dampens productivity across the economy. H-1B visas are not a comprehensive solution to the shortage, but they provide a partial offset allowing US companies and universities to recruit skilled individuals globally. This not only adds expertise directly but also promotes knowledge transfer, as international researchers contribute to American innovation ecosystems.
Industry leaders have responded cautiously with statements that sounded as though they were torn between their need for high-skill talent from abroad and a desire not to be seen as opposing President Trump’s agenda. NVIDIA CEO Jensen Huang declared immigration to be the “foundation of the American Dream” and “really important to the country” while simultaneously avowing support for general immigration reform. Similarly, Sam Altman noted the importance of attracting top talent through streamlined processes while offering a very vague endorsement of “sort of outlining the financial incentives.” These statements seem internally contradictory pointing to the fine line the American technology leaders are walking along the divide of immigration and talent attraction.
At another level, these statements make perfect sense. One of the most likely consequences of H1-B policy change is a reduced competition between large, well-financed firms and their smaller competitors. Tech giants with vast resources can absorb the additional costs recruiting the best global talent. Startups and mid-sized companies, however, may find themselves priced out of the H1-B market, limiting their ability to bring in specialized expertise. Add to this competitive disadvantage the reality that researchers and graduate students may increasingly look elsewhere—toward Europe, Canada, or Asia—where immigration rules are more predictable and costs lower.
In short, the policy seems likely to exacerbate the US talent deficit at a moment when global competition in AI and other advanced fields is intensifying with what many analysts believe could be existential consequences. Our innovators will increasingly be caught between backing the administration’s aggressive crackdown on all forms of immigration and the strategic imperative of sustaining American leadership in science and technology.
