PAGE_TITLE: 
	Oh, Grow Up! | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

AI is leaving its ‘adolescence’ and preparing to take on the tasks of adulthood.
The human teenager is a wonder to behold, a mix of child-like enthusiasm and emerging adult capacity. What they lack in guile they more than make up for in what feels like (to their parents) boundless energy.
This is an apt metaphor for the state of AI development and humanity’s relationship to it. We are shocked by its potential while remaining amused and sometimes alarmed by its naivete and lack of judgment. AI can be impulsive, context-fragile, and unreliable when asked to anticipate and manage consequences over time while excelling at isolated feats of intelligence. A brilliant kid who isn’t quite ready to be turned loose on the world.
Like most obvious tech sector problems, AI’s adolescence drew the attention of some highly intelligent engineers who spotted a market opportunity. At the end of 2025, a group of expats from xAI, Anthropic, OpenAI, and Google DeepMind teamed up to found humans&, a new firm with ambitions to help AI grow up. The founders—Eric Zelikman, Andi Peng, Yuchen He, Georges Harik, and Noah Goodman—succeeded in raising a record-breaking $480 million in seed funding earlier this month. In tech-speak, humans& is building a meta-layer for collaboration: not a new intelligence benchmark, but a prefrontal cortex that operates across people, tools, and time, to see forests rather than trees.
humans& believes long-horizon reinforcement learning in multi-agent environments can help human-AI teams better plan, coordinate, and adapt over extended periods in settings where multiple teams and systems are acting simultaneously, and where successful outcomes depend on sustained, coordinated interaction. The company’s bet is that this approach can produce something like judgment: the capacity to anticipate conflicts, remember past commitments, adjust to changing conditions, and steer collective behavior. Instead of optimizing isolated tasks, humans& products will seek to look weeks or even months ahead.
The appeal of the idea, and the reason investors are rushing to put money into it, is that many business concepts and strategies fail not due to a lack of raw intelligence but because of organizational and supply chain sandtraps that weren’t seen or addressed in a timely fashion. This class of AI is designed to target that problem directly by helping knowledge and work activity cohere into insight.
The executive function the company envisions is not a feature but a governance system. Reverting to our brain metaphor, the prefrontal cortex is not an app layered on top of perception; it is embedded in how information is evaluated, prioritized, and acted upon. If humans& succeeds, its technology will not feel like software teams periodically consult but more like an ambient constraint or conscience that silently and implicitly shapes behavior because it is always present.
The investment logic follows naturally. The marginal cost of information and intelligence is rapidly falling toward zero. Executive control remains scarce. Supplying the missing layer of restraint, memory, and prioritization is a new frontier of opportunity and value that focuses on the interactive, social component of work rather than particular knowledge domains.
It also holds the potential to address some of the most serious concerns about ensuring that AI remains aligned with human values. It appears humans& wants to embed a type of inhibitor that guides human behavior but also limits the potential for “agentic drift” in the AI itself. Adolescents with extraordinary capacities would be dangerous not because they lack ability, but because they lack inhibition. humans& is betting that the future of AI depends on constraining, conditioning, and contextualizing AI behavior rather than expanding its capabilities.
It will be interesting to see if the company can pull it off. Executive function, founded in implicit skill, is notoriously difficult to formalize and may stumble on domain-specific needs. A system that coordinates supply chain logistics may have no idea how to coordinate a finance team. Then there’s the risk a company would take on by delegating such delicate work to a non-human, agentic system. The adolescent phase of AI was about proving what was possible. Adulthood will be measured in trust.
