PAGE_TITLE: 
	New Fed Study: AI Is Squeezing the ‘Skills Commons’ | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

A new analysis from the Dallas Fed’s J. Scott Davis offers some of the clearest labor market evidence yet on how AI is reshaping work with serious implications for younger workers.
The Fed finds employment in the most AI-exposed sectors has declined roughly one percent since late 2022 (ChatGPT’s release), while the broader economy added jobs at more than twice that rate. The effect (irony alert) has been felt most acutely in computer systems design, with employment down five percent.
The further irony is that wages in the most affected sectors are rising. In computer systems design, wages are up 16.7 percent compared to 7.5 percent nationally. Davis says the apparent contradiction is resolved by looking at experience levels. More senior workers with tacit knowledge (the type that accumulates over time by doing a job rather than through formal instruction) are better matched to an AI-infused economy in which automated systems and outputs require scrutiny and judgment, a case of age and guile overcoming youth and energy.
Davis found that occupations with the highest “experience premiums” (lawyers, credit analysts, marketing specialists) are seeing wage gains with increased AI exposure. Occupations with low experience premiums are seeing slower wage growth—not absolute declines, but a measurable drag relative to trend.
The policy problem is the erosion of the skills commons—the tacit knowledge and judgment that experienced workers carry, the types of attributes everyone wants and no one wants to pay to develop. Entry-level employment has historically been the mechanism by which tacit knowledge became widely distributed, allowing junior workers to learn by doing, accumulating the judgment and experience that makes them valuable over time. Firms that used to hire junior employees to do entry-level tasks are finding AI can handle those tasks more cheaply. The economy broadly benefits from sustaining the skills commons; individual firms want to avoid the costs, and the skills commons suffers, potentially impairing the economy’s long-term performance.
To be sure, as AI improves, productivity rises, and incomes grow, new occupations will emerge. In the long run, we’re all employed. (It might also be true that advancing AI takes over the judgment-heavy tasks as well—a problem for another day.) But the short- and medium-term transition issues remain, as does the longer-term tacit skill challenge. The economy increasingly values judgment, taste, and experience over narrower training and credentials. Where will younger workers develop those skills if early trial-and-error employment is reduced? We should be thinking about ways of supporting and expanding on-the-job work experience opportunities and incentivizing employers to build such human resource strategies into their workforce planning.
Davis is careful to note that the current model of white-collar career development is becoming cost-ineffective for firms in the short run, but it may be unsustainable to abandon that model in the long run. Building approaches to education and training to develop those skills is one of the central workforce policy challenges of the AI era.
