PAGE_TITLE: 
	The Coming Acceleration | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

In the world of generative artificial intelligence, things are moving fast, and they could start moving a lot faster. Assuming that current data and design barriers can be overcome, this technological acceleration may deliver either unimaginable benefits or pose one of the greatest adaptive challenges humanity has ever faced. Or perhaps both.
If you haven’t heard about “recursive” artificial intelligence, you might want to bone up. Simply put, a recursive AI can improve itself through iterative testing, evaluation, and self-modification. Advancements that might have previously taken months or years for human researchers to achieve could instead be done by AI in hours or days. While still in its infancy, fully developed recursion would have a massive effect on the pace of technological development, economics, employment, and society more broadly.
Admittedly, there is a great deal of volatility in the way AI is developing, so all predictions are uncertain. The purpose of this analysis is not to predict any specific future development but to raise some informed questions about the way emerging recursive AI behaviors might affect society and the workforce.
We’ve been here before—or at least we think we have. The machine age didn’t just give us steam engines—it produced child labor, dangerous urban factories, decades of worker agitation, and, out of that unrest, contributed to the rise of dangerous new ideologies like communism and fascism. Electrification remade cities but also displaced trades and reshaped social and economic rhythms. This is the pattern: change, uncertainty, social adaptation.
Most recently, robotic automation displaced millions of manufacturing workers, setting off new crises for non-college-educated workers in the US and abroad. Each leap forward solves problems and advances economic well-being, but also creates new, hard-to-predict frictions and challenges. So it is likely to be in a world of recursive AI, which belongs in the lineage of transformational change, but with a critical difference: pace. Steam engines, electricity, and even the Internet, all took decades to diffuse fully. Recursive AI could collapse diffusion into years, leaving us precious little time to come to terms with it.
Two recent papers illustrate what this transformation might look like. One reports on an AI system that generated, tested, and evaluated 1,773 new neural network architectures, yielding 106 state-of-the-art linear-attention models. These models provide the basic physical and analytical frameworks for large language models (LLMs). The AI selected the most successful new architectures for incorporation into subsequent generations of algorithmic development.
Depending on what type of processor was used (the paper didn’t specify whether it was the fast ones or the really fast ones), the project’s ~20,000 GPU-hours represent roughly 10²²–10²³ arithmetic operations, costing between $36,000 and $180,000, again depending on the chips used. Traditional neural architecture design typically involves human researchers proposing, designing, and testing architectures one at a time over months. A recursive AI system compresses what would otherwise be 3–5 years of human research into days of computation. It also demonstrates how novel AI approaches can spin out hundreds of candidates overnight, prune the failures, and refine the successes into the next generation of models. Of particular note is that recursive LLM improvements upgraded the foundational tech on which practical AI applications are based. This is the pivot point for dramatically accelerated and self-reinforcing innovation.
The second paper projects this scenario into the future, positing a theoretical structure for building AI systems that can formulate hypotheses, design experiments, and interpret results autonomously across scientific disciplines. Imagine an AI capable of running virtual experiments at a scale no lab could ever hope to match. It might propose a new antibiotic, simulate its effectiveness across millions of biological models, discard the failures, and hand a human researcher a fully vetted drug candidate for clinical trials. Applying that principle to every field of scientific endeavor gives a sense of just how profound the developmental speed-up might become.
This is not simply faster science, but a quantum acceleration in the scientific method—not in the sense of quantum mechanics, but in the sense of a discontinuous leap to a new timescale. Questions that once took decades to answer could be resolved in days through millions of parallelized virtual experiments. Such an acceleration would be like having the chance to go from horse and buggy to discovering nuclear power and landing on the moon, but in a handful of years rather than a century.
Critics of this view rightly point out that physical constraints and computational limitations currently do not permit such an acceleration. Any future recursive AI is bounded by the need for vast new data, immense energy and semiconductor resources, and corrections to persistent problems like hallucinations, edge-case failure, and data corruption. True breakthroughs will require not just faster models, but advances in efficiency, validation, and interpretability to turn simulated discoveries into a trusted scientific advancement. It bears noting, however, that recursive AI may itself turn out to be a critical ally in finding solutions to these problems. What looks insoluble today is likely to be remedied over time through the same process of AI-driven experimentation.
The conceptual foundations of generative artificial intelligence are rooted in the work of the 2024 Nobel Prize winner in physics, Geoffrey Hinton. Hinton deliberately sought to pattern AI neural networks on the way the human brain operates through vast networks of neurons. In other words, AI systems are designed explicitly to mimic our brains, linking disparate nodes of knowledge and behavior to create consciousness and intelligence. The brain as it exists today evolved over millions of years, while AI’s cognitive evolution is occurring on the timescale of years—or, optimistically, decades—and operating in ways even its engineers struggle to understand.
The results are already astounding. For example, Caltech scientists recently reported that an AI cracked a stubborn physics problem that had defied the work of dozens of human researchers for decades. Unencumbered by the human aesthetic preference for elegant solutions and the received intellectual traditions of physics, the AI solved the challenge through “brute force” means: it simply ignored prior methods and conventions. As the scientists reviewed the AI’s results, they at first thought it was “nonsense” and “a mess”—that is, until it worked. It turned out the AI wasn’t nonsensical; it was using a logic and approach so different from prior attempts that it was initially opaque to humans. The key achievement was not computational speed per se, but the ability to explore architectural design space systematically at a scale that would be impractical for human researchers. Despite its human origins, AI intelligence increasingly looks like a difference in type rather than degree.
At scale, this expanded and novel experimental-developmental capacity over compressed timelines would likely deliver enormous benefits to human well-being (e.g., cure diseases, extend lifespans, solve the energy-climate change conundrum). It also entails the risk of maladaptive AI developments, also known as “technical debt,” that accumulates over time and, in the highly integrated AI ecosphere of the future, could be shared instantaneously across networks. How confident are we that human beings working with the old-style, carbon-based hardware and low-voltage software would be able to manage the new, silicon-based, fast-as-light intelligence? The implications of recursive AI tend to spill into every corner of human concerns. Take global security. If autonomous systems can design and deploy new real-world and cyberworld weapons or destabilize financial markets, they might end up creating vast instability in economic and social arrangements. AI systems could upend the logic of nuclear deterrence by reducing already frighteningly short decision times in a world already balanced precariously on the nuclear threshold.
The first nations to harness recursive AI at scale could seize enormous first-mover advantages in defense, technology, and economic strength. The US, China, and the European Union are already investing heavily, but a recursive breakthrough would intensify that competition, creating the risk of an AI arms race with few rules, little restraint, and potentially existential consequences.
This is why the current research into AI alignment, reliability, and predictability matters so much. Researchers at OpenAI, Anthropic, and DeepMind are experimenting with techniques like “constitutional AI” and mechanistic interpretability (reverse engineering AI outputs to discover how the model produces them) to give humans better control over and visibility into how these systems think and how they can be kept on track as data sets change and unanticipated edge cases emerge. But even those working on the frontier admit their windows into the operations of their creations are limited. The simple truth is that our governance frameworks—the FDA for drugs, the FAA for aviation, and so on—will be severely taxed by technologies that evolve in weeks rather than decades. Again, what may be required are governor AIs that can quickly assess emerging technologies for safety.
Finally, recursive AI also raises questions that cut to the core of human identity. History suggests that when machines take over tasks previously reserved for humans, our sense of purpose requires recalibration. The rise of industrial weaving displaced artisans; the calculator diminished the economic value of manual computation; and digital photography abruptly ended centuries of darkroom craft. Robots moved workers off assembly lines. In each case, human meaning shifted, sometimes painfully, from the pride of doing a task well to the challenge of finding new domains where human skill, creativity, and judgment still mattered. Recursive AI could force a similar reckoning, this time not for a trade or an industry but for basic research and other intellectual tasks. Human beings as the apex intelligence might be supplanted.
Meaning and purpose—perennial, nonnegotiable human needs—are often linked to the sense of satisfaction we derive from shaping and contributing to the world. Since we are a thinking, self-reflective species, those needs occupy the top of Maslow’s hierarchy; with AI, the top could suddenly get more crowded, setting off competition—not for material goods but for the remaining opportunities to explore meaning, purpose, and satisfaction. It is hard to predict what an AI-driven existential crisis, scaled across the globe, would mean for individuals, communities, and nations.
Not everyone agrees that this future is close. Skeptics argue that current systems lack the stability or autonomy to achieve true recursion. They may be right, which means we will have more time to consider strategies for adaptation. But betting against technological acceleration does not seem wise. Even if recursive AI falls short of the most far-reaching forecasts, its trajectory forces us to confront what it might mean to no longer be the smartest or most creative intelligence in the evolutionary room.
The central policy dilemma is pacing innovation without smothering it. Every time we move to limit the freedom of science to whether and how we explore, we are potentially depriving ourselves of beneficial breakthroughs. At the same time, the “tragedy of the commons” is also in play, as the temptation of profits or dominance trumps thoughtful regulatory fencing. As we’ve seen with social media, the rush to tap new markets can put some segments of the population, like children and adolescents, at risk. Caution (if not precaution) with AI seems more than warranted.
At the same time, excessive, prevention-oriented regulation could drive recursive AI underground, offshore, or into the arms of authoritarian systems, leaving democratic societies vulnerable to regimes unchecked by negative outcomes or voters. Striking the right balance will require new governance models that are anticipatory of and responsive to developing threats while not stifling innovation.
Core adaptation strategies should emerge from intensive dialogue between those advocating for precautionary regulation and those who take a more accelerationist view. This kind of liberal democratic debate structure has the virtue of forcing “steelman” exchanges where experts from both sides grapple with the best arguments of their opposites rather than the weakest. This is an extraordinarily difficult assignment in our highly polarized society, where questions are coded either “left” or “right” and adjudicated largely on that basis. Somehow, we must allow more space for evidence, philosophical reflection, and the weighing of trade-offs while we still have time to do so.
When it comes to AI, our challenge is to ensure that when (not if) this new intelligence grows beyond us, it still benefits human flourishing in ways that outweigh the risks it will inevitably bring.
Raphael Colard, a research associate at AEI, contributed to the writing of this article.
