PAGE_TITLE: 
	AI: Damned If You Don’t | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

There’s a duel going on in the minds of American workers over artificial intelligence. On the one hand, there is substantial anxiety about whether AI is a human-replacing technology. Seventy-one percent of Americans say they are worried that AI will eliminate jobs. On the other hand, some companies—especially those driven by equity markets to sustain profit margins—are requiring employees to use AI to boost productivity, sometimes with serious consequences for those who resist.
A recent Wall Street Journal Tech News Briefing captured this dynamic. The reporters highlighted how firms are using a combination of carrots and sticks to encourage the transition to AI-infused business operations. They’re setting up required trainings, running internal workshops, and encouraging employees to share practical tips with colleagues. Early adopters are rewarded with better assignments and even cash incentives for using AI to improve efficiency.
Other companies are taking the next step: upskill or outplacement. The WSJ podcast episode highlighted IgniteTech, an enterprise software company, which has made AI use mandatory. The company adopted an “AI Monday” program that sets aside time for experimenting with new AI tools. Employees earn points for sharing their insights on practical AI uses on the job. Self-assessments of AI use have been built into reporting chains. IgniteTech used ChatGPT to analyze these use reports and rank employees based on the results. After a “human-in-the-loop” review, those with the lowest scorers were dismissed, resulting in several rounds of layoffs. Even senior leadership took part, and one senior executive who warned that the cuts posed risks to the company’s performance was let go.
The question is why some employees and managers resist obvious uses of a technology that can make work more efficient, and often more enjoyable, by removing repetitive tasks from the workflow. Naturally, there is more than one reason. As the IgniteTech example shows, fear of being replaced can become a self-fulfilling prophecy. Cognitive rigidity—the unwillingness or inability to adapt to technological change—may also contribute to foot-dragging.
All these reactions make sense at a human level, just as they have in other chapters of automation. Workers who didn’t adopt computers, spreadsheets, or email eventually fell behind. The difference today is the speed at which AI is evolving and the degree of financial and competitive pressure to capture efficiency gains, some of which inevitably cascades down to individual job expectations.
Still, adopting a punitive approach to AI adoption is likely counterproductive in the long term. Employee knowledge about companies and their operations has its own value, even as AI speeds up business processes. This implicit or tacit understanding of the inner workings of a company is also critical for providing oversight to AI systems that lack the context and judgment to know whether their recommended outputs are appropriate, ethical, and practical. To capture the “both-and” value of human augmentation, employers (and shareholders) must be patient and allow workers the time and mental space they need to adapt.
The direction of travel is unmistakable: In the emerging workplace, AI is becoming a foundational skill along with literacy, numeracy, and tacit skills. Employers and workers should seek the golden mean to maximize AI benefits while minimizing the anxiety and stress that accompanies change of this depth and breadth.
[related-items item=”” title=”Learn more:”]
