PAGE_TITLE: 
	Hello, Technical Debt | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

For years, some of the builders of our digital future have tech-splained the necessity of “moving fast and breaking things.” A stodgy, backward-looking legal and regulatory guardrail system, the argument goes, must yield to the shock troops of a vibrant, technology-driven future: stand back or get smashed. Of course, this ethos has delivered astonishing miracles that are likely to accelerate as AI systems are increasingly able to improve themselves. That deserves at least two cheers.
But on the other side of the ledger, hidden wreckage—going by the antiseptic name “technical debt”—has been accumulating. Technical debt is shorthand for “I’ll fix it later,” with it defined as the dangling threads, imperfections, and “good enough” design and coding choices that maintain technical momentum and allow highly leveraged companies to ship revenue-generating products.
This week, the butcher’s bill for those shortcuts started to come due. The Wall Street Journal reported on a Stanford University experiment testing the capacity of AI to automate sophisticated penetration of real-world software systems. The study compared a group of highly skilled human red-teamers with an AI agent that scans networks, platforms, and webpages to identify vulnerabilities and devise ways to exploit them. The human testers, who normally work with businesses on cybersecurity issues, bill at roughly $2,500 per day. The AI system, called Artemis, costs less than $60 an hour to operate, and yet it outperformed nine out of ten human testers.
These outcomes show how technical debt and technological advancement can combine to increase negative exposure latent in long-forgotten code. As large language models take over an increasing share of new coding tasks, they rely heavily on vast libraries of existing software often riddled with loose ends and unpatched vulnerabilities. “Later” has arrived when it comes to the risks this creates.
Artemis was far from perfect. It made mistakes that humans caught easily and hallucinated flaws. But it also demonstrated that AI-driven adversarial hacking has its own scaling dimension: the capacity for high-volume, rapid, and systematic vulnerability discovery that, at least in the short term, may overwhelm our best efforts to block attacks. Attempting perfection against an adversary that must only occasionally be right is an impossible standard to meet. A massive, pre-emptive campaign to close existing gaps and prevent new ones is urgently needed.
There is no realistic way to halt or even slow AI development occurring in parallel around the globe, nor should we. The AI revolution will deliver benefits we cannot yet fully imagine, even as it creates serious new headaches. Fortunately, AI can also be an ally in addressing the problems it creates and exposes by accelerating vulnerability discovery, assisting security review, and eventually supporting more resilient coding practices. In the meantime, we need to confront the technical debt problem directly, before automated adversaries come to collect at a vastly higher price.
