PAGE_TITLE: 
	Opportunities and Pitfalls for a New Transatlantic Relationship on Tech | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

My AEI colleague Claude Barfield recently wrote about the growing interest in resetting the US-EU relationship on digital and technology issues — and the daunting obstacles standing in the way. Right on cue, the European Commission has released a proposal titled “A new EU-US agenda for global change” suggesting the transatlantic relationship is in need of “maintenance and renewal” while the Joe Biden administration is being formed. In discussing future transatlantic cooperation on tech policy, there are opportunities for productive collaboration — such as on cybersecurity and supply chain security issues — but topics like antitrust and digital taxation should be nonstarters.
The EU is taking full advantage of President-elect Biden’s comments that he wants to reset America’s relationships with its allies. Many of the policy items the Europeans are hoping to align with the US on are related to the “digital regulatory environment.” The EU highlights that both sides value openness, creating an opportunity to collaborate against authoritarian powers (read: China) using their policy agendas.
The Europeans’ desire to move on from the past four years of transatlantic tension and try to find common approaches is laudable. Mutual concerns about China could produce meaningful cooperation on cyberespionage and supply chain security. Collaborating to improve collective cyber protection and establish a mutual understanding of trusted networks would undoubtedly benefit the transatlantic allies.
It makes sense for like-minded nations to address cybersecurity challenges as a joint force, especially when confronting digital challenges posed by nation-state actors. US-EU cooperation on unilateral trade measures against China could bolster American efforts to convince European countries to join the US in shunning Huawei equipment from their 5G networks due to ongoing security concerns.
These aspects of security and trade policy should be top-line items for the US-EU transatlantic dialogue. However, the opportunity the EU sees to bring the US into the fold on EU initiatives to tax Big Tech and dismantle Silicon Valley’s leading companies with antitrust investigations and fines should be a nonstarter.
According to the proposed agenda, the EU wishes the US to be a partner in a “transatlantic dialogue on the responsibility of online platforms and Big Tech, to find global solutions for fair taxation and market distortions in the digital economy.” The US and EU view competition law and data protection (often confused with and mislabeled as privacy) differently. The European proposal wishes to promote “regulatory convergence” on antitrust and data protection that would have the US yield to European competition rules and the accompanying market definitions and privacy directives.
In the US, antitrust authorities have historically relied on strict economic analysis and the consumer welfare standard — whether consumers are harmed in a relevant market — to evaluate business conduct and mergers. European competition law is not underpinned by the same principle. In congressional testimony, antitrust expert Geoffrey Manne notes that since EU competition enforcers can “call upon a large list of justifications for their enforcement decisions, they are free to pursue cases that best fit within a political agenda” instead of focusing on how to best protect consumers. This has resulted in EU regulators using antitrust as a weapon against American tech companies, levying multibillion-dollar fines that are out of touch with economic realities.
The EU’s idea of “harmonizing” on taxing US tech companies is simply an attempt to create an additional revenue stream for cash-strapped governments by targeting the success of America’s most innovative companies. Talks on digital taxation at the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) have gone on for years to no avail. The push for a global digital tax regime that includes digital services taxes has been stopped by US diplomats who recognize it as a money grab. The Biden administration should be “potentially as concerned about taxes that seem to be targeted at US companies as the Trump administration is,” according to Brian Jenn, a former US Treasury official and co-chair of the OECD’s Task Force on the Digital Economy from 2017–2019.
The UK, Spain, Italy, and (most notably) France have enacted or are considering digital tax laws. In 2019, French President Emmanuel Macron’s proposal for a unilateral 3 percent digital services tax on American tech companies that was touted as “fiscal justice.” President Donald Trump met this idea head on by threatening tariffs of up to 100 percent on French wine, cheese, and other products. French Minister of Finance Bruno Le Maire noted this week “that he hopes to convince Biden to re-engage with the OECD process so an agreement [on overhauling the global tax system] can be reached.”
In tech policy, there are areas like cybersecurity where the US should seek productive transatlantic cooperation. But on antitrust and digital taxes, punishing America’s tech champions and helping European governments pay their bills — especially on the backs of US companies — should have no place on the Biden team’s to-do list.
[related-items item=”” title=”Learn more:”]
