PAGE_TITLE: 
	The Rise of E-sports and Competitive Gaming: Highlights from My Conversation with Lindsay Poss | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

As people search for virtual entertainment during the COVID-19 pandemic, the video game market has kept many people well-occupied and connected to a community. Will the gaming industry continue to surge after the pandemic, and what new policy challenges come with more eyes on gaming screens?
On the latest episode of “Explain to Shane,” Lindsay Poss, director of communications at the Technology Policy Institute, joined me and my research assistant William Rau to discuss her first academic paper, “The Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Gaming Galaxy,” along with the dynamic past, present, and future of the gaming industry.
Below is an edited and abridged transcript of our talk. You can listen to “Explain to Shane” on AEI.org and subscribe via your preferred listening platform. You can also read the full transcript of our discussion here. If you enjoyed this episode, leave us a review, and tell your friends and colleagues.
Shane Tews: The gaming industry has been particularly successful recently, but when did gaming first “break out of the basement” and become such a significant part of the entertainment landscape?
Lindsay Poss: Some stereotypes say gaming never “broke out of the basement,” but the reality is a much more robust industry. Gaming and competition have been popular since the dawn of time, but video gaming really took off in the 70s, then this new e-sports and competitive gaming scene rose to prominence with the launch of Fortnite three years ago. The interest in the competitive gaming landscape is really what changed the space. I should give more credence to the platforms that were there before, but suddenly, certain platforms and things became much more mainstream with the rise of Fortnite, and gaming culture grew from that.
The unique aspect of gaming is that people can interact when they’re off-platform through watching streamers. Rather than the lean-back experience of television, streaming lets people actually interact with the games they play and like in a way that’s not as intense as playing them. That was one of the things that brought this space into greater prominence: the chance to follow different games and streaming personalities without having to intensely engage with the actual game.
From that, a whole world has emerged, and as this world becomes more involved and gets more tools and popularity, more people are able to enter it. It has become a very diverse community. Basically everyone can find something that they’re interested in now, and it’s even more accessible with the wonderful internet.
In your paper, you explain the differences between the three main gaming platforms: the console, the PC, and mobile. Walk us through these differences.
It’s sort of similar to how Netflix is available across the TV, computer, or phone, and is optimized depending on what device you’re using. In PC and console games, you can sit down and play for hours at a time. Mobile games, however, can be a little bit more passive attention-getters or in between. The more complicated games then tend to be played on PC and console, and games can also be played across platforms. Fortnite, for example, can be played on all three. But Fortnite sorts players into buckets and games depending on what input they are using, so PC players will play with other PC players, Xbox with Xbox, PlayStation with PlayStation, and mobile with mobile. You have kind of an equality across fields of input.
We went from going to a physical store to buy a disk to playing online where it’s more of a pickup basketball game in the park with different people every day. Sometimes you win, sometimes you don’t, but it’s always the same game. There are some linear challenges in getting better, but for the most part, it’s kind of a one-off occurrence where you can go in and play the game.
I am still blown away by the idea of people viewing e-sports. Give me some data points on this. I realize it’s so serious that they even have full-time Wall Street analysts in this space.
There are different types and levels of stadium play, ranging from amateur individual tournaments to professional team tournaments. The most popular one globally every year is the League of Legends World Championship Final. For the past three or so years, it has drawn around a hundred million or more unique viewers around the world, and is kind of the pinnacle of success when it comes to having these tournaments.
Here in the US, we do have professional leagues of gaming. We have the professional NBA 2K league and the professional Overwatch league, and they have followed the same model as traditional sports with broadcast rights, and they do have in-stadium tournament play. Those are almost a direct one-to-one to what we would think of with traditional football or basketball or any other pro sport. And then you have a whole other slew of professional tournaments where individuals can enter, teams can enter — all kinds of things. There have been some popular ones at Madison Square Garden and the Staples Center in LA that have people down in the center where the field of play, typically, is a bunch of computers and a bunch of software — all of which is broadcast on huge screens for the audience.
In the US, we haven’t had anything that’s been quite as successful as the League of Legends World Championship Series, but there has been a lot of experimentation. I think in the next couple of years some type of accessible format will emerge that has broadcast rates, that sees a lot of prominent and important sponsorships, and that plays on different known platforms for consuming media.
But I will say that it’s far more accessible than it seems. I know it seems overwhelming, but these games are similar to what we would think of as traditional sports. You pick up a few key points and you can follow along with what’s happening, and the crowds also help because they “ooh” and “aah” at the appropriate moments.
William Rau: I also wonder if association with tech industry leaders can help e-sports teams get off the ground. Comcast (a big Philadelphia-based tech/content provider) is building an e-sports arena two blocks away from Philadelphia’s biggest sports complex, which is an icon for the city’s sports fans. However, I wonder if the average person who does not follow tech policy would even know this is happening.
That’s where I think the personality of the people is very important. But when we talk about younger people, they’re the ones who will support this market. As those younger people grow older, I’ll be curious to see whether they shift to more traditional media formats or actually stay involved in gaming. As we see now, people in their later 30s who grew up playing PlayStation and Xbox when they were young are still sticking with gaming, and their kids are now getting involved with gaming, too.
Development of regional cities and big partnerships with these big ventures might happen 10 or 15 years down the line, but for now, I think the crowd is a little bit more agnostic when it comes to actually attending in person, particularly after COVID, or supporting a certain region because of where they live. The data suggest that people either follow games or they follow personalities. So, I’ll be curious to see how that winds up incorporating into a more professional industry, but as of right now, the hometown stadium aspect doesn’t seem as important.
Shane Tews: Walk us through what’s going on with Apple and Fortnite.
Fortnite is developed by Epic Games. Epic Games used to sell its games through a platform called Steam, where you would log on and pay to download a copy of the game. Steam would then take a 30 percent cut, but Epic Games said, “We don’t like that,” and created its own storefront called Epic Games Store in which they now release not only their titles, but other developers’ titles at only a 12 percent cut.
So, Epic Games has this history of wanting to eradicate the amount of sharing that happens in the gaming industry. Like Steam, Apple has the same 30 percent cut on its iOS store for any in-game digital purchases — things like digital currency in Fortnite that unlock special items or battle passes. Epic Games did not like that Apple was taking a 30 percent cut of those payments, and decided to offer a separate option that would reroute users to their own storefront — the Epic Games Store — knowing that it was going to cause problems with Apple and violate their terms of agreement.
Epic definitely got what it asked for. Apple has stated its rules. Other app developers follow those rules and Epic did not, but they were expecting this response. They had already prepared litigation against Apple and Google (who have the same 30 percent cut on their stores) and are now trying to fight to get that lowered for app developers. Apple then removed Fortnite from its game store and said that after August 28th, it would no longer support Unreal Engine, which is Epic Games’ way of allowing app developers to build new apps. Unreal Engine is used for many gaming apps and is supported across all the major platforms, but with Apple’s threat to remove it, Fortnite and several other games will become inaccessible.
Epic has now filed an emergency injunction saying that Apple cannot remove Unreal Engine — a developer tool many smaller third-party app developers rely on. Microsoft then came out in support of that and said that Apple’s actions toward Unreal Engine were not fair, particularly to the smaller game developers. And now everybody is just very mad at each other.
For those interested in following the gaming industry, where do we learn about all this?
Twitch is the easiest platform, but there are tons of game streams out there. It is a little bit overwhelming, but you can always use Twitch’s sorting functions to find who is the most popular at different times or what game is most popular.
I also follow ESPN e-sports and Bleacher Report e-sports on Twitter, along with Polygon — The Verge’s gaming publication. There are many good news outlets and reporters whose work makes it really fun and interesting, so it’s a very fun, bright world to be involved in.
