PAGE_TITLE: 
	Expanding America’s Cyber Toolbox: Highlights from My Conversation with Mieke Eoyang | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

A recent wave of cyberattacks has breached American critical infrastructure and highlighted our lack of preparedness for future threats. Heading into the next administration, how can the US better prevent cyberattacks and impose consequences on their perpetrators? How can government and industry collaborate to thwart these attacks and curtail their potential damage?
Mieke Eoyang, senior vice president for Third Way’s National Security Program and chair of its Cyber Enforcement Initiative, joined my podcast to “explain” how the Biden administration can advance the US cybersecurity agenda. Mieke recently co-authored a Lawfare piece called “A Road Map for Tackling Cybercrime,” which outlines key cyber policy recommendations for the next administration. She also just launched the true-crime podcast “To Catch A Hacker,” which chronicles the pursuit of famous hackers and cybercrime perpetrators.
Since this episode was recorded, Mieke was appointed deputy assistant secretary of defense for cyber policy by President Biden.
Below is an edited and abridged transcript of our talk. You can listen to this and other episodes of “Explain to Shane” on AEI.org and subscribe via your preferred listening platform. You can also read the full transcript of our discussion here. If you enjoyed this episode, leave us a review, and tell your friends and colleagues to tune in.
Shane Tews: You recently co-authored a piece in Lawfare outlining a set of cyber priorities for the new administration. Among these, what are the most pressing recommendations?
Mieke Eoyang: Overall, we think that confronting cybersecurity challenges head-on is something that you have to do. It can’t just wait until later, because the threat is happening now.
People spend a lot of time worrying about: How do we defend the systems? How do we close the loopholes? How do we look for attackers on our networks? How do we make products more secure? How do we have better passwords? That’s all really important, but our organization has realized that we’re not doing enough to go on offense against the human beings on the other side of attacks, because every single one of these malicious activities has a human being who is thinking it up and executing it. And that person largely feels like they are operating with impunity and that they are never going to get caught.
We have thus spent the last few years trying to understand what we need to do to get to the human being, whether that’s a criminal cyber actor or whether that’s a nation-state conducting cyberespionage — which is obviously a little bit more complicated and goes into the realm of diplomacy and national security policy. But we tried to understand what makes those cases so hard, and we tried to measure how law enforcement is doing.
First of all, we discovered that only about three in 1,000 reported cyber incidents see an arrest, and that the cyber incident reporting rate is incredibly low. Far more people experience cybercrime than ever report it to the FBI, so we know that the effective enforcement rate is very, very small. We’re trying to figure out how to make it less cumbersome for law enforcement to operate effectively here. And because law enforcement often works at analog speed while attackers work at scale — at digital speed — we have to bring law enforcement up to speed in terms of how to identify and locate the attackers at scale.
We also need to figure out how to work with law enforcement agencies in other countries, because often, these attackers are not located in the United States. We saw this with SolarWinds. We’ve seen this with other things. The attackers are in all kinds of places: Iran, North Korea, Russia, Romania, Indonesia, all over the world. Criminal actors could be anywhere, so we need to work across borders with law enforcement.
Finally, we have to constantly measure our progress and try to maximize coordination with all entities involved. For example, what does the White House need to be doing to get all of the different agencies who have a stake in this on the same page?
I know that we work with many other countries bilaterally, and our multilateral commitments appear to be holding together despite occasional shakiness.
On that note, there seems to be a lack of common understanding on why we don’t want some sort of cyber treaty. Why is that?
It is true that cyber norms are really important, but norms and treaties are only as good as their enforcement; otherwise, they’re just nice words on a piece of paper somewhere. There is one big cybercrime treaty, the Budapest Convention, and the Russians and the Chinese have put forward another one for UN consideration. The problem, though, is that one person’s definition of a cybercrime is another person’s definition of free speech. And so we have seen the Russians and the Chinese try and use cybercrime as a guise to crack down on their dissidents, which diverts focus from what we seek to address in cybercrime: ransomware attacks, disruptive attacks, attacks involving fraud, criminal attacks for money, etc. And so by looking at those edge cases, we’re not really reaching that much agreement on what precisely the cyber norms should be, precisely.
But I think that we can start to build cyber norms through enforcement and through those bilateral agreements — agreements concerning how we share information about crimes. By prosecuting certain kinds of crimes and having other countries turn their people over to us for prosecution, they make very clear what kind of behavior is and is not acceptable in the international arena, and that starts to build international practices in ways that actually get due follow-up and enforcement. We hope that we can build a real sense of international law through enforcement, but that means bringing cases.
Let’s talk about information sharing, because that’s another issue we have at both the national and international levels. It’s similar to how the Center for Disease Control approaches pandemics: The faster you can catch these crimes as they unfold and inform those who are at risk, the faster you can contain the situation.
But that’s always been a challenge for us at the federal level because of our long-standing analog laws that separate, especially, the military and the Department of Defense from other agencies. Part of what we saw with the recent SolarWinds attack is that the affected agencies weren’t immediately informing each other of what they were seeing. How do we address that?
We note that that’s a problem, and that we need a better, healthier dialogue between the private sector and the government. When we talk about information sharing, we’re talking about a broad range of things — some of which are specific to criminal prosecution and some of which are about protecting networks. And so Michael Daniel (the former White House cybersecurity coordinator) and I were talking about this; we actually need to be more specific when we say “information sharing” to specify what kinds of information we’re talking about, which will help us better understand the legal frameworks in which that information can be shared and the legal risks that occur from such sharing.
I realize this is looking in the rearview mirror, but after recently experiencing all that we’re learning about with SolarWinds, is there anything in your recommendations that — had it been implemented — would have put us in a better spot now?
Yes. One thing we recommend is the reinstatement of the White House cyber coordinator or the national cyber director — either one, but what’s very clear is that while you might not have been able to stop the SolarWinds hack from happening, a centralized, coordinated response at the White House level would absolutely have helped us with the response. Since you’ve got a whole bunch of different federal agencies all looking on their own networks, it’s not clear that we have the big picture of what’s happening here.
My understanding is that there has been some interagency fighting about who does what. Having the White House involved to do that kind of quarterbacking is essential — making sure there are clear lanes in the road for who’s talking to the private sector, who’s doing what pieces of it, etc. Otherwise, we’re going to get redundant and miss things.
When we think about response, we also need the State Department at the table. The SolarWinds hack, which we’ve now attributed likely to Russian actors, will require a foreign policy response, but all of the agencies have to come together to talk about options and potential risks of any coordinated response.
How about training? We just don’t have enough people joining the right side of cyber. Are we getting better at that?
That’s an excellent question. Look, Silicon Valley has been very good at recognizing that formal education is not necessarily the qualifier that you need to have a successful career in cyber. On the government side, I’m not sure if we’ve done the same. I think we need to think more creatively about how we bring people in, not only into the private sector but into government.
One thing that was bipartisan in the last year was the Cyberspace Solarium Commission report. Is there anything in that report that we should take a hard look at?
Well, they talk a lot about the creation of the national cyber director, which they did by legislation, and so that’s very exciting. President Biden has indicated that he will appoint someone to that position, which is really helpful. The report also mentions a bureau of cyber statistics, and we think that’s really important.
But one thing to keep in mind with the Solarium Commission — which is why we think of our work as a companion to it and not contradictory to it — is that by statute, that Solarium Commission’s purview was mostly on the national security and Homeland Security side. As much work as they put in and as thoughtful as they were, they just weren’t allowed to look at certain parts of the problem. It was not as much on the State Department and law enforcement side since they were not chartered to look at those things. We look very deeply at the law enforcement and State Department angle, and so you should probably take a look at those two things together to see how they mesh because this is really an all-of-government problem that requires all-of-government solutions.
[related-items item=”” title=”Learn more:”]
