PAGE_TITLE: 
	Securing US High Tech Supply Chains: Highlights from an Expert Panel Discussion | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

My last blog post recapped the first part of AEI’s September 18th web event in which I discussed information and communications technology supply chain security with Rep. Mike Gallagher (R-WI). Following that conversation, I moderated a panel discussion with Robert Strayer of the Information Technology Industry Council (ITI), Kathryn Condello of Lumen (formerly known as CenturyLink), Robert Morgus of the US Cyberspace Solarium Commission, and Maryam Khan Cope of the Semiconductor Industry Association (SIA). Together, we addressed supply chain security and related issues including 5G, cybersecurity, wireless-wireline interoperability, and the future of American tech manufacturing.
Below is an edited and abridged transcript of key highlights from the panel discussion. You can view the full event on AEI.org and read the full transcript here.
Shane Tews: Rep. Gallagher and I started to talk about the standards process, which will dictate how we manage the supply chain situation. Can you all elaborate on that for us?
Robert Strayer: Let me start one level of abstraction higher. 5G is a really good example of why we need to pay attention to the supply chain becoming more of an important economic and national security issue. When we look at 5G, it’s not static. We know about a 5G today that is largely sold as increased bandwidth and throughput capacity, which will accelerate the ability of our smartphones and other devices to connect to the internet.
But the real promise of 5G will be in these use cases that will evolve over five or 10 years to become the foundation for all future critical infrastructure — the supply of electricity, water, autonomous vehicles, and even automated manufacturing is going to be one of its key use cases. Because too much will ride on 5G is why about two years ago, the US government — in collaboration with our key partners — started working together to think more about how to secure a 5G infrastructure.
Government can facilitate, incentivize, and make it easier to collaborate and encourage companies to do so, but it shouldn’t be trying to pick the winner itself, because that’s only going to be an interim winner at best, and it’s also probably not likely to be the correct one for the market’s longer-term success. There is really great promise in the 5G area of being able to open up the architecture of 5G to have additional components. Traditionally, it has been very difficult for new companies to come into the market and provide particular components for particular aspects of the network if they weren’t making the whole solution at once. So, we’re likely to see more of an open architecture — something they call OpenRAN: open radio access network.
We’re also going to see a movement to more virtualization, so more software-defined functionality that previously had only been done with hardware. Hardware components take longer to produce, and there are lots of advantages to having the functionality provided by software. That virtualization is another key feature we’re going to see emerge more and more in the years ahead.
Kathryn, he’s talking about your business — the wireline business. You’ve got a government partner here trying to make things more secure, but this might put some obligations onto the equipment that you guys are buying. Explain this to us.
Kathryn Condello: We call this digital transformation the “fourth industrial revolution,” and in the wireline space — the Lumen space — this is changing the environment so that we’re focused now on delivering applications, data, and services, and we’re not doing it in the traditional cloud versus premise versus transport way. This, in essence, is an environment which is going to prioritize the end user services that they’ve dictated through enabling the fastest, best, most efficient, most secure transport and management of those capabilities. If promised correctly, this will be done in an environment where you can connect all these things irrespective of location. It can be, in essence, location agnostic.
These are some of the tenants and principles they’re creating as part of Lumen’s platform. Well, doesn’t that sound an awful lot like 5G? So what we make in the wireline space is “next-generation” or, in Lumen’s case, the “fourth industrial revolution.” We’re looking at how to make this actually happen faster. We’re looking at some of the new capabilities that are going to be driven by customers, whether it’s DoD or the federal government or the banks or transportation in the cities. Only four or five years from now, 75 percent of enterprise-generated data is not going to be done in a data center or a cloud. It’s going to be done closer to their edge.
Our model allows users to put the security — whatever they want for their application services or their operations — more in their control. And furthermore, in the interoperability piece, while we’ve very much focusing on O-RAN or, in our case, Metro Ethernet, we also feel that it needs to dive deeper. We need to be talking about the underlying thing that’s running everything in the next-generation networks, which, of course, to Rob’s point, is software-defined networking and network function virtualizations.
To Kathryn’s point, everything eventually touches backhaul, right? It’s great if it’s wireless or satellite, but eventually it’s going to hit a wire. So, I imagine you guys are spending a lot of time trying to figure out: If it’s hitting a wire, how do I know that wire is safe? How do I know that the next part of that process is safe and then, moving forward, that we’re continuing to keep it safe? Inform us.
Robert Morgus: I think the point about trustworthiness is interesting and important, and when the commission took a step back and looked at this issue, obviously we had our initial recommendation in the March 2020 report. But after looking at the issue in a little bit more detail, we recognized that there are a bunch of aspects to trustworthiness, and one of those is certainly the jurisdiction under which different parts of supply chain touch.
So, for example, if you are touching mainland China, do you become beholden to the Chinese National Security Law, the Chinese National Intelligence Law, and the Chinese Cybersecurity Law, and what does that mean for the supply chain? With that insight, we realized that the US is lacking certain core industrial capabilities to ensure that we have the production of essential technologies, including next-generation telecommunications equipment.
That shortcoming of our industrial capacity opens us up to a number of risks. One of them is the trustworthiness risk: Can you trust the component? Can you trust the final good if you don’t really have a great view into the supply chain for that good, or if you do have a great unit of supply in the chain of that good but you know it’s touching adversaries where it may become a subject to malign influence? The second is this question of availability, which I think is underappreciated and under-touched-on, and it also almost runs in tension with the first.
So, when we look at supply chains, when we look at availability, we think about geography as an important component, but it’s not necessarily just onshoring. There’s a component of identifying key partners, identifying key allies, and bringing that to bear. With those insights in that risk profile as the backdrop, the commission took a step back and said, “What does the United States need to be doing from a governmental perspective to facilitate a more robust and clearly trusted supply chain for our critical suppliers?” We focus on ICTs (information and communications technologies), and because we focus on ICTs, we touch on things like materials and important components — like what Maryam will talk about with semiconductors.
Maryam, I want to bring you into this conversation because you are that supply chain that we keep talking about. Silicon is where it all starts.
Maryam Khan Cope: There are some key things that make the semiconductor industry very unique in the ICT discussion. The industry is America’s fifth largest export by revenue, so we are actually a huge engine for economic competitiveness and technological leadership for America.
Our industry tracks pretty closely with the history of America. We came out of Silicon Valley as part of the post-World War II industrial base. Many of the scientists that established semiconductor companies came out of partnerships with the DoD and Department of Energy and were preeminent engineers and researchers that figured out that they wanted to take silicon and make it into something amazing.
Our industry now supplies close to 50 percent of the global semiconductor market, and we have an extremely global and complex supply chain that essentially takes sand and turns it into chips, and uses thousands of engineers and scientists. To continue the US semiconductor industry’s competitiveness, we really need access to global markets, because it’s an extremely expensive proposition to make a chip. The industry is also the second-highest intensity R&D industry in the United States; last year we spent about $18 billion in R&D, and these are real scientists in labs trying to figure out how to make computers better, faster, and smarter.
The other trend we are all very cognizant of in light of COVID-19 is that global demand for ICT is skyrocketing. We anticipate that global demand for chips is actually going to increase by 50 percent from 2020 to 2030, and it will need a related amount of increase in manufacturing facilities. Those facilities offer great jobs and are also filled with people who can help innovate on the next-best generation of chips, which will fuel AI, quantum, exoscale, and the industries of the future. Those manufacturing facilities are extremely expensive to build. We have them in 18 states across the United States, but they cost between 10 and $40 billion to build depending on the chip. Additionally, 75 percent of global manufacturing capacity right now is located in East Asia because of the government incentives that those East Asian countries offer.
We need to make sure we’re on the leading edge of cybersecurity for hardware through a multilayered approach that accounts for architectures at the chip level, further along in the manufacturing process, then further along in the network. I think resiliency and trust are really important. In terms of follow-on impacts from supply chain actions, the reality is that we live in a multipolar world. China is a rising power, and it is also a huge buyer of chips. (They import more chips than oil in China.) So, access to that market is crucial for the US semiconductor industry, because access will fuel the R&D of the future. It is vital for policymakers to strike the right balance by looking at resiliency and trust to secure supply chains without cutting off American companies from a key market.
