PAGE_TITLE: 
	Using AI to Fight AI in the Email Inbox | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

Artificial intelligence is accelerating the scale and potency of the malicious activity in your email inbox. These threats no longer obvious; instead, they take the shape of professional and sophisticated messages tailored to your interests and current correspondence. But with the cybersecurity landscape quickly shifting due to AI-powered illicit activity, how can we ensure a secure inbox? And what would that practically look like?
Shane Tews spent some time discussing this and more with Cy Khormaee and Ryan Luo, co-founders of AegisAI. Cy and Ryan have spent a combined 12+ years at the forefront of cybersecurity, working to help reimagine and practically apply security on a personal level.
Below is a lightly edited and abridged transcript of our discussion. You can listen to this and other episodes of Explain to Shane on AEI.org and subscribe via your preferred listening platform. If you enjoyed this episode, leave us a review, and tell your friends and colleagues to tune in.
Shane Tews: How did you both decide that email security is something that you wanted to tackle, and how’s it going?
Cy Khormaee: Ryan and I worked together for a combined twelve years at Google, trying to protect Gmail and Chrome, and all the tools we know, from phishing, malware, and fraud attacks.
We really got inspired by the mission. This is such an important thing: Nearly every single person has an email inbox and has gotten phishing, or malware, or something nefarious in their inbox. We’ve been trying to solve this problem for many, many years.
And what we observed is that with AI, these attacks are getting worse and worse, and they’re getting smarter and smarter. When we looked forward, we said, “Hey, there must be an AI-native solution.” We must use AI to fight AI. And we got started from there.
Ryan Luo: On our side, we noticed—especially because we were at Google—we built these large platforms and worked with some amazing people building Safe Browsing, reCAPTCHA, and protecting billions of people. From that vantage point, it was really easy to see all of the AI-powered acceleration that was coming through the systems.
Cy and I were on a surf trip—we read some research papers together. We realized that this is a great opportunity for us to build some AI-native defense so that we can keep up with these AI-powered attacks.
Why is it so difficult to secure the email inbox?
Cy: It’s been a perennial problem. Email has been around for about 50 years, and this has been a problem for about 50 years, right? 90 percent of attacks start in the inbox. It’s always where all the bad things start. It’s the front door to your internet and ecosystem. The first thing people have to realize is that if you leave it open, threats will come in for sure.
If you look a little bit deeper: What is email? There’s a lot in there. Like the rest of the internet, it’s amazing because anyone can send an email to anyone. It’s not moderated by any big government or organization—it’s just out there in a protocol where people can send messages to each other, which is a beautiful thing.
But the challenge with that is that bad actors can get on that network too, and there’s no regulation. We’re all there, and we’re free to communicate with each other, but we’re also obligated to defend ourselves from whatever else might be on that network. It’s a difficult open-network problem.
Then, underneath that, emails are really complicated. You have a “to” and a “from”—identities are there. You have what’s in the envelope: the text, what they’re communicating, attachments, domains, and links. There are so many things that could be in that email. It’s like a box shows up on your doorstep, and you’ve got to wonder who it’s from, what’s inside, and what could be there. There’s a lot of investigation that must happen.
The prior generation of technology in AI couldn’t introspect that box. It was really based on pattern matching. And now we’re just getting to the technology where unsupervised learning and some of these new LLM techniques are enabling us to truly understand the full contents of an email in a way that was never possible before.
What are some ways that nefarious actors can trick email users into falling for these scams?
Ryan: There are two main ways to do it. Either the expensive way of creating your own LinkedIn identity and accumulating that reputation over time, or even just leveraging and impersonating a pre-existing identity, and then using that to pose as an individual. Both impersonation and fake account creation are problems here.
Cy: It’s also not just about impersonating a person; it’s also about people compromising and impersonating large companies. We’ve seen this happen with Fortune 50 companies that have been compromised and are sending their customers malicious content.
It really goes across the spectrum where any address on the internet can be malicious. That’s what makes it a very difficult problem to solve because essentially any address, any website, can be compromised. They can be hacked, there can be misconfigurations, there can be ways that attackers find their way into these systems and leverage their good name and reputation to send malicious content. This is a classic pattern of fraud that we’re seeing increasingly.
Ryan: This is something attackers have observed: What you can do to start is create a new account to send spam. But generally, many systems are pretty good at recognizing when an account is new. Attackers usually must grow that account’s reputation over time, which is expensive. Or you can compromise a legitimate channel such as automated systems. There are these email systems that are very good at getting emails into your inbox. For example, a very simple example: if you buy something on Amazon, you get a notification.
Now, this channel is not necessarily easy to compromise, but there are other automated systems that may be vulnerable, and what you can do is inject your own content, leverage the same automated system to then make sure that that email gets delivered. The tricky part is that this problem of compromising existing automated infrastructure will exist if there’s automated infrastructure. As companies create new ways to send emails, roll out new products, create new confirmation pages or email streams, these channels will continue to exist, and they can continue to be compromised.
Walk us through an actual anatomy of a phishing email. What should we be looking out for?
Ryan: The main thing I would do is first look at that lure, and there usually would be some sender. Really look at that email address and make sure it’s an address that you recognize. Oftentimes, that’s where the first mistake happens. You look at the sender name, which can be completely spoofed, but the email address is what you really want to see and validate for correctness.
Now, there are sometimes that you get an email address from a personal email or business email you don’t recognize, and you need to validate the authenticity of that identity. The way to do that is to go through a trusted channel—either through an official website or by calling a number that you know. The way not to do it is to reply to that email and ask if they are the right person or not, because if it’s suspicious, they’ve likely already controlled that account.
There are further things you can do, depending on your level of sophistication on checking the actual authentication records of that email. Your mail provider does a reasonably good job here, but because it’s quite complex and the open-protocol nature of email makes it very hard to secure across the entire industry. In fact, I think about 50 percent of email sent today still don’t use the most up-to-date email authentication protocols.
What we started with is this idea that it’s the human that’s the problem here, not the machines. What tools do individuals and organizations have to help secure their email inbox?
Cy: People think that people are the problem, but I really think that’s not the future. If you think about this, these attacks are getting increasingly sophisticated. They are going to outsmart people. If anyone thinks they’re going to train their employees to stop AI-powered attacks, they’re in for a very rude awakening.
I’ve shown this one phishing example to maybe 500 CISOs. Less than one percent can spot why it’s malicious. These are true experts—20+ years of experience, extremely smart people—and they can’t see it. Average employee, average human: no shot.
The answer must be to use AI to fight AI. That is the future. And it’s incumbent on us as security professionals to stop the threat.
Ryan: What we talk to our customers about is how traditional attacks happen, why they exist, why they persist, and why new attacks keep coming in. And really, it’s about the way we’ve built our systems. We’ve built these traditional security rule systems, and a simple way to explain a rule is, for example: “Hey, popular websites are safe. So if a website has been viewed by many people, it’s probably safe.” Or another rule might be, “If the word ‘DocuSign’ appears in an email, the email sender itself must be from the DocuSign domain.”
These are hard and fast rules that help security professionals build systems that work reasonably well at scale. The challenge is that by relying on things like rules, you allow for rule invention—where attackers start thinking about ways to bypass the rigid structures we’ve used for detection.
An example could be compromising a legitimate site that is popular, and now, all of a sudden, you’ve bypassed that reputation rule. Or you could misspell “DocuSign.” We’ve all seen examples of that. More advanced cases involve attackers injecting hidden text within “DocuSign,” so that humans read “DocuSign,” but the system sees something else. Or you can compromise trust in mail delivery channels.
What we need is a non-rule-engine approach, but rather an agentic approach, where you have your artificial intelligence or system think more like a human analyst than a rules engine.
And this is our thesis: How do we build an AI-native company that thinks about detection in an AI-native way? Meaning that we think about detection more from a human perspective—an agent perspective—versus a rules perspective.
