PAGE_TITLE: 
	Decentralization & Portability: Reimagining Social Media Platforms | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

Decentralization is a core value of Bluesky Social, a social media platform that originally stemmed from Twitter. The platform empowers users to curate their own experiences—actively selecting the content they want to see and interact with, rather than simply consuming feeds delivered by standardized algorithms. This focus on user control, along with portability—the ability to take one’s social media ecosystem across platforms—sets Bluesky apart from most other social networks. But why are these values so central to Bluesky’s mission, and what impacts do they have on the user?
You will find the highlights of my conversation with Matt Reeder, head of legal at Bluesky Social. Previously the chief of legal and operations at OnlyFans and a trial attorney in the General Litigation Division of the US Marine Corps, Matt’s extensive experience made for an engaging and informative conversation.
Below is a lightly edited and abridged transcript of our discussion. You can listen to this and other episodes of Explain to Shane on AEI.org and subscribe via your preferred listening platform. If you enjoyed this episode, leave us a review, and tell your friends and colleagues to tune in.
Shane Tews: What was the original idea behind the creation of Bluesky?
Matt Reeder: Bluesky started in 2019 as a project inside Twitter. From the very beginning, the idea was to make social media platforms interoperable. In 2021, it spun out of Twitter as an independent company and completed the project of creating a set of standards and rules for how platforms could interoperate—what became the Authenticated Transfer Protocol (AT Protocol).
After Twitter was acquired, the team realized it was unlikely that Twitter would participate in this open standard, so they decided to build an example app to show what was possible. That app became what most people think of as Bluesky today.
The app opened to the public in February 2024. We’re only about 20 months into that part of our journey, and since then, we’ve accumulated over 40 million users on the network. Today, there are hundreds of Authenticated Transfer apps that users can choose from.
To make it more practical—as you already mentioned—the real problem we saw was that large incumbent platforms owned and monetized their users’ social graphs. To us, the users should own those graphs and shouldn’t suffer high switching costs caused by the lock-in effect that most people accept as normal today.
That means if you join an Authenticated Transfer app like Bluesky, you can see the content of users on other apps built on the same protocol. Some that have gained traction are Flashes, a photo-centric platform; Skylight, which focuses on short-form videos; and Black Sky, an app created for members of the Black community—particularly those from what used to be called “Black Twitter.”
You can use your Bluesky identity to join and log into those other apps. This interoperability is real and working today. If you start on Bluesky and decide to switch to Skylight, you can do that—and your social graph goes with you.
Am I right that my Bluesky identity could plug into other apps or even AI-driven platforms?
That’s right. The limits of what can be built on the AT Protocol are really just whatever the creativity of developers allows. We’re already seeing interesting experiments.
When it comes to social media, there’s the identity layer—who you are and how you sign in; the app view layer—the interface that pulls data and presents it to you (like a browser for social content); and the data layer itself—which can be photos, videos, web embeds, short-form posts, or even long-form blogs.
Depending on which app you use, you might see different combinations of this content. Some apps are already acting like blogging platforms connected through AT. So there’s really no limit—we haven’t reached it yet.
Because the protocol is decentralized and open, once you’ve created your identity, you can take it anywhere—wherever your interests or preferences lead you. You don’t have to start over every time.
Does Bluesky create a network effect—does it already “know me” when I join?
That’s a great question. The short answer is yes—though it depends on how you define “network effect.”
From a developer’s perspective, the benefit is immediate. For example, when I joined Bluesky, I set up my graph—the accounts I followed, my feeds, the people who followed me—and built my microblogging experience. Then I downloaded another AT app, Flashes, and logged in with my Bluesky credentials. Instantly, I saw all the people I already followed on Bluesky and could view their photo content—even if they weren’t Flashes users themselves.
That’s the power of interoperability. When a new developer builds an app on the AT Protocol, on day one, the first user who joins already gets access to a network of 40 million existing users. So the network effects that normally take years to build are already there—shared across the entire ecosystem.
What are your regulatory concerns when it comes to portability and decentralization?
We’re no different than other platforms in terms of the mandate to comply with all applicable online safety laws. Front of mind for everyone, and certainly for us, are these laws, which we’re seeing more at the state level and in some other countries.
We have spent time on the Hill to educate, because we’re a little different from the large incumbent platforms. When members of Congress, their staff, and think tanks are thinking about how to regulate, there’s a baseline assumption that all platforms look, act, and collect data like the big ones and we don’t do that.
Sometimes these laws hit differently, and the harms or dangers lawmakers are most concerned about are things we are built to avoid. There’s an irony there, because in some cases, it’s the data that big platforms collect that leads to the harms legislators want to prevent. But the expectation is that those platforms will use that same data to comply with the law.
That can leave us in a tough spot, because we don’t have the data in the first place—which means the harms are less, but compliance can be more challenging.
Are laws ready for user-owned, portable identities such as Bluesky’s?
I think some legislators have already thought about the question of interoperability. I know that there was at least one bill a couple of Congresses ago where there was the thought of perhaps legislating a requirement of interoperability. It’s not a totally new idea to every office we talk to, and we’ve gotten a really good reception.
I think that most people on the Hill have used social media and probably joined a new platform and experienced the struggle of having to start from zero—so that helps. We have a receptive audience in the sense that folks understand the problem.
In terms of legislating, at the platform level, it’s relatively easy. We can talk about how we’re different as a platform and how some of these laws are challenging or whether we think they apply to us. It gets really interesting when you start talking at the Authenticated Transfer level, especially since some state laws defining the platforms that are subject to the laws can be very broad.
A simple example is language that says something like, “online services that make available data for social interaction” are subject to the law.
Bluesky the app—easy, that’s us, yes, the law applies, we’ll figure out how to comply with that law. But at the protocol level, we look more like a data hosting service. There’s data there, and if you use an app, you can access the data for purposes of social interaction. But is that “make available,” which is an undefined term in the law?
We do see some of this sort of wobble, where it can get a little challenging.
