PAGE_TITLE: 
	Why Mandating Social Graph Interoperability Is Risky:Written Testimony on HB 1589 | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

Introduction
I am writing to voice concerns about the Digital Choice Act. In my professional capacity, I have testified before the Senate on data ownership, explored the technical problems in trying to change social media technology through regulation, and written extensively about interoperability mandates. While the Act is framed as innocuous, what is being considered is one of the most complex, risky, and least tested forms of interoperability.
As currently written, the Act would require social media companies to share a user’s social connections with other users and entities, their profile, comments, reactions, mentions, reposts, shares, and other engagements, as well as the “relational references sufficient to maintain the associations among” them. Maintaining these associations would likely mean that a social media platform like Facebook would be required to offer up the ordering, threading, and nesting of comments; mentions and tags connecting users across content objects; timestamps, visibility settings (public, friends-only, group-limited); group or page membership contexts; and even engagement metrics that determine how interactions are interpreted downstream.
In practice, if you and I were friends on Facebook and I decided to use an interoperable service, all of your comments would be included in the data stream. In other words, implementing interoperability for social graph data would require violating the privacy of users who never consented to data transfers in the first place.
As the following testimony explains, four problems stand out:
The Digital Choice Act violates core tenets of privacy and would codify the same data-sharing architecture that enabled Cambridge Analytica.
As written, the bill contradicts itself. It requires “continuous, real-time” data sharing while limiting that sharing to “reasonable and proportionate thresholds.” Real-time federation and periodic data exports are fundamentally different systems with different privacy implications and different technical requirements.
The hard questions are left to rulemaking. The Act assumes that open protocols can support secure, abuse-resistant social networking across various platforms, but it doesn’t specify minimum security standards or establish liability rules when data is breached or misused after leaving the originating platform.
Finally, economic research suggests that interoperability is just as likely to entrench dominant platforms as to discipline them by encouraging hesitation, strategic incumbent responses, and partial exit rather than real competition.
