PAGE_TITLE: 
	Online Expression During Year One of Trump’s Second Presidential Term: Lofty Rhetoric Confronts a Dispiriting Reality | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

In his January 2025 inaugural address and an executive order issued the same day, President Donald Trump promised to “bring back free speech to America” by “immediately stop[ping] all government censorship” and “secur[ing] the right of the American people to engage in constitutionally protected speech.”
Five practices—ones the Trump administration either expressly deployed or allegedly adopted during approximately the first year since Trump’s return to the Oval Office—raise doubts about whether the administration is delivering on those righteous, first-day promises when it comes to online free expression.
Although some of the practices involve a chilling effect on online expression rather than direct censorship of it, they all should be significantly rolled back—if not completely abandoned—during the rest of Trump’s term for the president to fulfill his principled pledge to “bring back free speech to America.”
During his inaugural address on January 20, 2025, President Donald Trump made a stirring statement. It was an unambiguous message of constitutional importance that surely warmed the heart of anyone who believes in free expression as a fundamental pillar of a democratic society, safeguarded from government suppression by the First Amendment.1 Trump righteously proclaimed that “after years and years of illegal and unconstitutional federal efforts to restrict free expression, I . . . will sign an executive order to immediately stop all government censorship and bring back free speech to America.”2
Delivering on part of his promise, Trump issued Executive Order (EO) 14149 that same day, titled “Restoring Freedom of Speech and Ending Federal Censorship.” It opens by emphasizing that the First Amendment is “essential to the success of our Republic” and “enshrines the right of the American people to speak freely in the public square without Government interference.” The EO bluntly asserts that “Government censorship of speech is intolerable in a free society.” It adds that US policy is to “secure the right of the American people to engage in constitutionally protected speech” and “ensure that no Federal Government officer, employee, or agent engages in or facilitates any conduct that would unconstitutionally abridge the free speech of any American citizen.”3
The EO laudably rebukes former President Joe Biden’s administration for allegedly engaging in illicit jawboning—the practice of government officials informally censoring government-detested viewpoints and messages via the verbal arm-twisting of private entities.4 Jawboning becomes unlawful when it crosses the fine line separating permissible persuasion from coercive threats.5 As the US Supreme Court observed in 2024 in National Rifle Association of America v. Vullo, “Government officials cannot attempt to coerce private parties in order to punish or suppress views that the government disfavors.”6 Justice Sonia Sotomayor explained for the Court in Vullo that officials cannot “use the power of the State to punish or suppress disfavored expression.”7 She added that “to state a claim that the government violated the First Amendment through coercion of a third party, a plaintiff must plausibly allege conduct that, viewed in context, could be reasonably understood to convey a threat of adverse government action in order to punish or suppress the plaintiff’s speech.”8
President Trump’s EO references jawboning that the Biden administration purportedly engaged in against social media platforms to make them remove or de-prioritize users’ conservative-tilting messages. Those efforts were at issue before the Supreme Court in Murthy v. Missouri in 2024, but the Court did not rule on the claims’ substantive merits.9 The “Restoring Freedom of Speech and Ending Federal Censorship” EO, however, delivers a dose of executive-branch validation and vindication for the Murthy plaintiffs, declaring that for “4 years, the previous administration trampled free speech rights by censoring Americans’ speech on online platforms, often by exerting substantial coercive pressure on third parties, such as social media companies, to moderate, deplatform, or otherwise suppress speech that the Federal Government did not approve.”10
Collectively, Trump’s inaugural-day statement and corresponding EO boded exceedingly well for the future of free speech—especially online expression—during the president’s second term. More than one year later, this report examines the state of online free expression during roughly the first 12 months since Trump’s return to the Oval Office.
This review is especially relevant now due to disheartening findings that the Foundation for Individual Rights and Expression (FIRE) released in early February. Drawing on survey results from January 2026, FIRE’s chief research adviser, Sean Stevens, observes that “compared to last year, Americans are about five percentage points more likely to say the country is headed in the wrong direction when it comes to freedom of expression . . . [and] the small increase in trust the public had in President Trump to protect their First Amendment rights when he took office in January 2025 has now largely evaporated.” He adds that “confidence in Trump to defend First Amendment rights has declined compared to January 2025, regardless of one’s political beliefs.” Stevens concludes that “the message is hard to miss. Americans increasingly feel less free to speak, and many of them increasingly doubt that the president will protect the right that makes that possible.”11
These discouraging results raise serious questions about whether—at least, in the public’s mind—the Trump administration is delivering on the president’s promises to “stop all government censorship”12 and “secure the right of the American people to engage in constitutionally protected speech.”13 Trump’s EO pledged that no federal officer or employee would “unconstitutionally abridge the free speech of any American citizen,”14 but did the first year of Trump’s second term bear that out for online expression? Is the Trump administration engaging in tactics that have lessened public confidence in the president’s stated commitment to free speech?
This report identifies and then reviews five problematic practices affecting online speech—some alleged to be unlawful and others determined to violate the First Amendment—that Trump administration officials purportedly or expressly deployed. Even if they did not entail the government’s outright abridgment of internet-conveyed speech, some of the activities described here surely would deter or discourage the online dissemination of information and opinions that don’t neatly square with President Trump’s political agenda or views. This deterred-from-speaking phenomenon is known as a chilling effect on (or the self-censorship of) speech.15 In short, the five alleged or demonstrated practices conflict—to varying degrees—with Trump’s inaugural-day pledge to “bring back free speech to America.”16
The first questionable practice—one ironically centering on jawboning and now being litigated in Aaron v. Bondi and Rosado v. Bondi—involves Trump officials allegedly coercing private businesses to remove online applications and discussion groups that provide information about public-venue sightings of US Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) officers.17 As the plaintiffs in Rosado argue, the government’s “coercion of tech and social media companies to suppress [the plaintiffs’] ICE-related speech violates the First Amendment.”18 Whether government officials in Aaron or Rosado illicitly coerced businesses to suppress speech or merely used lawful persuasion and argumentation to convince them to do so remains to be determined.
A second tactic entails leveraging the Federal Trade Commission’s (FTC) regulatory power to inquire about, question, or investigate the practices of companies that provide vehicles for expressing, disseminating, or evaluating online speech. For example, NewsGuard Technologies sued the FTC and Chairman Andrew Ferguson in February 2026, claiming that for nearly a year, the FTC has “brazenly” used its regulatory muscle “to censor speech . . . simply out of disagreement with NewsGuard’s First Amendment–protected journalistic judgments about the reliability of news sources.”19
NewsGuard “rate[s] and review[s] the reliability of news sources across the open web, social media, and content platforms based on a set of apolitical criteria of journalistic practice.”20 Its complaint emphasizes that “Ferguson has been a long-time critic of NewsGuard”21 and “views [NewsGuard’s ratings] as biased against conservative publications.”22 The complaint also stresses that conservative news outlet “Newsmax [has] asserted repeatedly in its programs and publications that NewsGuard was biased against conservative media and websites.”23
Ferguson and the FTC, however, counter that they are concerned about possible “anticompetitive collusion in the digital advertising industry that withholds advertising from certain disfavored media,”24 including through “potentially anticompetitive advertising boycotts”25 influenced by NewsGuard’s ratings. The defendants note that “congressional investigations have connected NewsGuard’s services to ‘coordinated action to demonetize’ disfavored media entities.”26 “Disfavored media entities” apparently refers to conservative-leaning media organizations such as Newsmax.
A third troubling practice involves targeting people—for loss of employment or possible prosecution—who post offensive, hateful, or disparaging messages about public figures the Trump administration reveres, such as the late Charlie Kirk. For example, Vice President JD Vance stated in September 2025 that “when you see someone celebrating Charlie’s murder, call them out, and hell, call their employer.”27 Although there’s no First Amendment violation when a private employer terminates employees based on their online speech, statements such as Vance’s can chill the expression of First Amendment–safeguarded opinions by employees who would rather keep their jobs than speak out online and risk being fired. Whether the administration’s attempts to silence hateful yet constitutionally protected speech about MAGA’s venerated heroes is simply a one-off effort confined to stifling and canceling Kirk’s critics will be determined over the next two and a half years.28
A fourth controversial tactic pivots on monitoring social media communications and unmasking anonymous posters’ identities. This practice includes the reported use of “hundreds of administrative subpoenas” from the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) to Discord, Google, Meta, and Reddit seeking “the names, email addresses, telephone numbers and other identifying data behind social media accounts that track or criticize the agency.”29 Efforts to quash these subpoenas on First Amendment grounds are proving successful.30 Additionally, the DHS reportedly “spent nearly $10 million acquiring at least three social media monitoring tools” in September 2025, including ones that “use social media data scraped from the web and information from data brokers to help build dossiers of anyone with a social media account.”31
Knowing that one’s social media account may be monitored by the government could chill one’s willingness to engage in online political expression, especially if one’s views conflict with the Trump administration’s positions.32 This chilling effect is highly problematic because safeguarding political expression lies at the heart of the First Amendment.33 Importantly, monitoring social media accounts to deport lawful immigrants also raises First Amendment problems, with a federal judge ruling in September 2025 that “non-citizens lawfully present here in [the] United States . . . have the same free speech rights as the rest of us.”34
A fifth effort involves the Trump administration commandeering the automated out-of-office (OOO) email messages of workaday US Department of Education employees during the 2025 federal government shutdown.35 The Trump administration undertook this audacious move to convey its desired narrative about who—namely, US Senate Democrats—bore the blame for the record-setting closure. A federal judge ruled that the employee-email hijacking “infringed upon [the] employees’ First Amendment rights.”36 Specifically, US District Judge Christopher R. Cooper in American Federation of Government Employees v. US Department of Education concluded that the government violated public employees’ First Amendment right not to be compelled by the government to express objectionable viewpoints.37
Having encapsulated these five practices, I next elaborate on how each affects online free expression. I conclude by suggesting that severely limiting—even eliminating—the deployment of each during the remainder of President Trump’s term may be essential for him to earn a legitimate, long-lasting legacy as the president who brought back free speech to America in online environments.38
If the plaintiffs’ allegations in Aaron v. Bondi and Rosado v. Bondi are proved true in court—and that is a big “if” at this early stage of litigation—then the Trump administration will have committed nearly the same kind of jawboning to squelch expression that the Biden administration allegedly engaged in against conservative viewpoints and that was at issue in Murthy v. Missouri. It would also be the same brand of jawboning that President Trump roundly condemned in EO 14149, thus exposing him to charges of free speech hypocrisy.
The crucial difference, however, is that now the alleged jawboning targets content and information that doesn’t serve the Trump administration’s interest in letting ICE officers detain and arrest people, free from the public scrutiny and attention that might expose abuses of power. Aaron centers on the Apple App Store’s removal of the crowdsourced ICEBlock app, “which allows members of the public to report publicly observable locations” of ICE officers. Joshua Aaron, ICEBlock’s inventor, alleges that US Attorney General Pamela Bondi and the federal “government used [their] regulatory power to coerce a private platform [Apple’s App Store] to suppress First Amendment–protected expression” about where ICE officers are publicly performing their duties.39
Rosado involves Facebook’s removal of a group called “ICE Sightings—Chicagoland,” which plaintiff Kassandra Rosado created to let her “fellow residents of Chicago . . . share information about ICE sightings.”40 Rosado also involves the removal from Apple’s App Store of plaintiff Kreisau Group’s application Eyes Up, which lets “users . . . preserve and view videos of ICE activity across the country.”41 The heart of the plaintiffs’ argument in Rosado (a similar contention is made in Aaron, but with different facts) is that Bondi and Kristi Noem, then–secretary of homeland security, were attempting
to control what the public can see, hear, or say about ICE operations. Wielding the power of federal criminal law, they coerced Facebook to disable Rosado’s Facebook group and coerced Apple to remove Kreisau Group’s Eyes Up app from its App Store. That’s unconstitutional. The First Amendment prohibits the government from coercing companies to censor protected speech.42
The plaintiffs in Rosado add that
Bondi and Noem, along with their subordinates in DOJ [the Justice Department] and DHS, have repeatedly threatened to prosecute individuals and entities for disseminating information, including through apps and social media groups, about ICE operations. They took actions to coerce Facebook and Apple to remove such apps and groups, including those of plaintiffs.43
One important fact that may influence the outcome in Aaron and Rosado is that more than a half dozen federal appellate courts recognize a First Amendment right to peacefully (and without interfering) record police officers working in public places.44 Walter Olson of the Cato Institute recently wrote that
while the Supreme Court itself hasn’t yet faced the issue squarely, the seven federal circuits that have done so—the 1st, 3rd, 5th, 7th, 9th, 10th, and 11th—all agree that the First Amendment protects the right to record police performing their duties in public. Those circuits cover such populous states as California, Texas, Florida, Illinois, New Jersey, Georgia, and Pennsylvania.45
Why is the First Amendment right to record law enforcement officials doing their jobs in public places important? The US Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit explained in 2025 that the right partly “flows from ‘our profound national commitment to the principle that debate on public issues should be uninhibited, robust, and wide-open,’ especially when it pertains to the actions of government officials.”46
Debate exists today about ICE officials’ actions on the nation’s streets, especially after the killing of Alex Pretti in Minneapolis, which arguably “galvaniz[ed] public sentiment against the federal government’s tactics and forc[ed] a remarkable retreat by the Trump administration.”47 The Seventh Circuit added in Nicodemus v. City of South Bend that “nowhere are the First Amendment’s protections stronger than in public streets, sidewalks, parks, and similar locations,” venues it characterized as “sacrosanct” for free speech.48 If the plaintiffs’ allegations in Aaron and Rosado are borne out in court, then the defendants’ jawboning will have violated people’s online speech rights to convey truthful facts about taxpayer-funded government employees—ICE officers—doing their jobs in public.
The plaintiffs in Aaron and Rosado, however, may have difficulty unearthing emails and other correspondence written by the defendants or their subordinates that “could be reasonably understood to convey a threat of adverse government action”49 against Apple or Meta (the company behind Facebook) if they did not remove ICEBlock, Eyes Up, or Rosado’s Facebook group. At bottom, such threats are essential for demonstrating that the government unlawfully coerced private businesses to remove or de-prioritize third-party content (including speech-disseminating apps) based on its disapproval of that content. Conversely, the Supreme Court has made it clear that “a government official can share her views freely and criticize particular beliefs, and she can do so forcefully in the hopes of persuading others to follow her lead. In doing so, she can rely on the merits and force of her ideas.”50 In other words, Bondi and Noem were allowed to persuade businesses to remove content, but they could not coerce them to do so.
In sum, if the allegations of unlawful jawboning in Aaron and Rosado eventually stand up in court, they will severely undermine President Trump’s promise to “bring back free speech to America.”51 Labeling President Trump an “online free speech defender” when he exits the Oval Office would have a far superior constitutional ring to it than branding him a “jawboning hypocrite.”
Under Chairman Ferguson’s leadership, the FTC is leveraging its statutory authority over businesses that engage in “unfair or deceptive acts or practices” and its antitrust power over “unfair methods of competition”52 to notify speech-based companies that it stands ready to intervene in idea marketplaces when it detects biases favoring liberal content over conservative views. While leveling the playing field of ideas sounds like a pro–free speech initiative, government interference with private businesses’ editorial discretion and independent judgment raises profound First Amendment concerns. As Justice Elena Kagan explained in 2024 for the Supreme Court in Moody v. NetChoice,
On the spectrum of dangers to free expression, there are few greater than allowing the government to change the speech of private actors in order to achieve its own conception of speech nirvana. That is why we have said in so many contexts that the government may not “restrict the speech of some elements of our society in order to enhance the relative voice of others.”53
Additionally, when addressing government meddling in private companies’ decisions about speech, it is essential to understand that the First Amendment “does not prohibit private abridgment of speech.” Instead, it “prohibits only governmental abridgment of speech,” as Justice Brett Kavanaugh explained for the Court in 2019.54 (Emphasis in original.) No First Amendment violation therefore arises when private businesses decide not to host or convey speech unless they have been unlawfully coerced by the government.
The statements by Justices Kagan and Kavanaugh are important because in February 2025, the FTC launched a request for information (RFI) tellingly titled “Technology Platform Censorship.” Among other things, the RFI sought public comment regarding “how technology platforms deny or degrade (such as by ‘demonetizing’ and ‘shadow banning’) users’ access to services based on the content of the users’ speech or their affiliations, including activities that take place outside the platform.” The FTC explained it was “interested in understanding how consumers have been harmed—including by potentially unfair or deceptive acts or practices, or potentially unfair methods of competition—by technology platforms that limit users’ ability to share their ideas or affiliations freely and openly.”55 The RFI seemingly pandered to some conservatives’ belief that social media platforms moderate content in ways that are biased against conservative speakers and viewpoints, and it therefore implied that government intervention is necessary to remedy the situation.
In an October 2025 report for the American Enterprise Institute regarding the RFI, I argued that “the First Amendment provides formidable pushback against the government using antitrust law to change how platforms moderate content. Four First Amendment principles—ones regarding editorial discretion, compelled speech, marketplace manipulation, and jawboning—create a fortress of constitutional protection shielding platforms from such attempts.”56
Several of those principles were announced or reiterated by the Supreme Court in 2024 in Moody v. NetChoice. The Court concluded in Moody that the First Amendment protects social media platforms when they make “editorial judgments” about how to moderate third-party content, including decisions by Facebook in its News Feed and YouTube on its home page regarding whether “to remove, alter, organize, prioritize, or disclaim posts.”57 Justice Kagan added for the Moody majority that “we have repeatedly held that laws curtailing [traditional publishers’] editorial choices must meet the First Amendment’s requirements. The principle does not change because the curated compilation has gone from the physical to the virtual world.”58 Kagan deemed it “no job for government to decide what counts as the right balance of private expression—to ‘un-bias’ what it thinks biased, rather than to leave such judgments to speakers and their audiences.”59
Unfortunately for free speech advocates, the FTC is also leveraging its regulatory authority in ways that threaten to interfere with—due to alleged political biases—the online First Amendment rights of entities beyond social media platforms.60 The ongoing case of NewsGuard Technologies v. Federal Trade Commission61 described above provides one such example, especially if the plaintiff’s allegations ultimately hold up in court.
In May 2025, the FTC served an extensive civil investigative demand (CID) on NewsGuard, requesting documents dating back to 2018 that provide details of numerous matters, including the company’s news reliability ratings, finances, and relationships with advertising agencies, as well as “documents reflecting allegations that NewsGuard’s reliability ratings are politically biased” or “unreliable, subjective, unscientific, or otherwise methodologically unsound.”62
As I described earlier, the FTC claims it is interested in possible unlawful collusion between NewsGuard and advertising agencies—collusion designed to get advertisers to boycott conservative-tilting news organizations such as Newsmax, which NewsGuard rates poorly in its news reliability rankings. The FTC and Ferguson explain that they want to “investigate online censorship from advertiser boycotts,” contending that “unlawful collusion could reduce competition in markets for advertising purchasing and other advertising-related products or services, which could in turn reduce consumer choice in content, degrade the quality of advertisements, and ultimately stifle debate on matters of public importance.”63
This logic resonates with—and carries emotional appeal for—some conservatives. For instance, the New York Post’seditorial board opined that
NewsGuard really is just anti-competitive graft dreamt up by opportunists to make money from liberal-driven “misinformation” mania—a graft designed to give elitist advertising and tech executives (who only vote one way) a reason to censor and defund voices that represent the views of the half of the country they can’t abide.64
If that’s true, then how does the FTC’s investigation of NewsGuard harm online First Amendment rights? The Wall Street Journal’s editorial board correctly contends that “the FTC is using its knuckles to chill private speech.” The board states that “Ferguson misreads the law in going after NewsGuard, a private outfit. The First Amendment protects private actors against censorship by the government,” and “NewsGuard can say whatever it wants under the First Amendment.”65
Charles Sauer, founder and president of the Market Institute, points out that “by trying to use antitrust laws to stop NewsGuard from sharing its views on other news sources—Chair Ferguson is engaging in censorship.” He notes that while “the FTC is accusing NewsGuard of trying to censor sites it deems not credible,” the reality is that “censorship is the use of force to silence speech. As a private organization, NewsGuard has no power to force advertisers to accept its boycott recommendations.”66
“NewsGuard’s rating service is quintessential journalistic activity protected by the First Amendment,” asserts Robert Corn-Revere, FIRE’s chief counsel and the lead attorney representing NewsGuard, “and the Supreme Court has unanimously affirmed that the government has no legitimate role in saying what counts as the right balance of private expression—to ‘un-bias’ what it thinks is biased.”67
The FTC has not limited its intrusive targeting to NewsGuard. Other companies that engage in First Amendment–protected online expression have been scrutinized for an alleged pro-liberal, anti-conservative bias. In August 2025, a federal judge preliminarily blocked “a sweeping CID” served by the FTC on Media Matters for America “purportedly to investigate an advertiser boycott concerning social media platforms.”68 Media Matters, however, contended the CID came in direct retaliation for a negative article the organization published in 2023 about Elon Musk’s X platform. US District Judge Sparkle L. Sooknanan agreed with Media Matters, explaining that
Media Matters is likely to succeed on its First Amendment retaliation claim, which is all it needs at this stage. Media Matters engaged in quintessential First Amendment activity when it published an online article criticizing Mr. Musk and X. And the Court finds that the FTC’s expansive CID is a retaliatory act. There can be no doubt that such a CID would deter a reporter of ordinary firmness from speaking again.69
More recently, in February 2026, Ferguson wrote to Apple CEO Tim Cook, “reminding him of Apple’s obligations to its customers” after reports suggested “Apple News systematically boosts left-wing sources and suppresses right-wing sources.”70 Ferguson cites a December 2025 report prepared by the Media Research Center, an organization that strives to “be the recognized leader winning the battle against online censorship, Big Tech interference in elections, and anti-Americanism from Silicon Valley–related entities.”71
Ferguson’s letter, in which he “condemn[s] any attempt to censor content for ideological reasons,” warns Cook that “any act or practice by Apple News to suppress or promote news articles based on the perceived ideological or political viewpoint of the article or publication, if inconsistent with Apple’s terms of service or the reasonable expectations of consumers, may violate the FTC Act.” Ferguson then “encourage[s] [Cook] to conduct a comprehensive review of Apple’s terms of service and ensure that Apple News’ curation of articles is consistent with those terms and representations made to consumers and, if it is not, to take corrective action swiftly.”72
Although some might consider this friendly, well-intended advice to keep Apple out of trouble, others might reasonably view it as jawboning designed to get Apple to promote more conservative-leaning news organizations and content so the company can stay out of the FTC’s crosshairs. The constitutional problem for the FTC, however, is the First Amendment. As the Cato Institute’s David Inserra writes, “The FTC’s allegations of bias, even if true, are ultimately irrelevant. The FTC has no authority to regulate the speech that Apple News chooses to curate.” Inserra adds that Ferguson’s “attack is predicated on a highly flawed theory that somehow the FTC has the ability to determine when the curation and moderation decisions of platforms are ‘unfair or deceptive.’”73
The New York Times’ editorial board concurs, explaining that “the premise of the Apple warning is legally creative and democratically dangerous,” with Ferguson seemingly “testing a novel theory: that editorial judgment can be regulated as a deceptive trade practice.” The Times’ editorial board explains that this “obliterates the traditional line between consumer fraud and protected speech. Historically, the First Amendment has limited the reach of consumer law to commercial speech or clear-cut fraud. By treating political bias as a defect in a commercial product, the F.T.C. is claiming the authority to police journalism itself.”74
The FTC’s use of allegations of ideational bias as an entrée point for government intervention in online speech marketplaces is not an isolated regulatory maneuver by the Trump administration to tilt media content in its desired direction. Although this report concentrates on online expression, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), under Chairman Brendan Carr’s leadership, is using alleged political bias by over-the-air broadcasters to justify potential intervention in and interference with networks and stations’ editorial decisions about content. To be clear, Carr likely would adamantly deny this.75 I explained, however, in October 2025 that
CBS recently installed a “bias monitor” in its news division to help gain FCC approval of the merger between Paramount (CBS’s owner) and Skydance Media. FCC Chairman Brendan Carr proclaimed that the commission had secured commitments from Skydance to “adopt measures that can root out the bias that has undermined trust in the national news media. These commitments, if implemented, would enable CBS to operate in the public interest and focus on fair, unbiased, and fact-based coverage.”76 (Emphasis in original.)
In brief, bias eradication now is the name of the regulatory intervention game. Philip M. Napoli, the James R. Shepley Distinguished Professor of Public Policy at Duke University, asserted in February 2026 that the FTC and FCC’s “regulatory and policy assault on media bias is itself clearly rife with bias, as it seeks to consistently tilt the playing field in one direction.”77 Napoli added that even “more important—and more concerning—are the ways in which these actions are exploring a range of regulatory rationales in an effort to circumvent the First Amendment.” That’s why, he suggested, “claims of deceptive practices, or collusion, or monopoly power are at the center of the FTC’s actions directed at media watchdogs and digital platforms.”78
The FTC’s use of its regulatory authority—imposed or threatened—to correct and eliminate perceived biases favoring liberal views raises serious First Amendment issues that undermine President Trump’s pledge to “bring back free speech to America.”79 At bottom, the First Amendment protects private entities’ editorial decisions from government interference, no matter how inventive or noble a regulatory work-around may seem.
Shortly after Kirk’s assassination at Utah Valley University on September 10, 2025, Vice President Vance filled in as host of The Charlie Kirk Show podcast. During the program, Vance stated that “civil society . . . flows from all of us. So when you see someone celebrating Charlie’s murder, call them out, and hell, call their employer.”80
US Attorney General Bondi chimed in, stating on The Katie Miller Podcast that “there’s free speech, and then there’s hate speech. And there is no place, especially now, especially after what happened to Charlie [for that] in our society.”81 She proclaimed that “we will absolutely target you, go after you, if you are targeting anyone with hate speech.”82 Since hate speech generally is protected by the First Amendment,83 Bondi later clarified in a post on X that “hate speech that crosses the line into threats of violence is NOT protected by the First Amendment. It’s a crime.”84
Vance’s statement on The Charlie Kirk Show and Bondi’s declarations on The Katie Miller Podcast seemed designed to chill the expression of speech—online and elsewhere—that is protected by the First Amendment. Celebrating a public figure’s death may be offensive, but there’s no categorical carve-out for it from First Amendment protection. Similarly, there is no unprotected variety of expression in the United States called hate speech. As the Cato Institute’s Thomas Berry wrote shortly after Bondi’s podcast remarks, “The nation’s chief law enforcement officer should know better. There is no ‘hate speech’ exception to the First Amendment.”85
Nonetheless, when the vice president intimates that people should be fired for celebrating Kirk’s death, why risk losing one’s job to express a viewpoint the Trump administration abhors? Indeed, a Reuters investigation published in November 2025 revealed that “more than 600 Americans [were] fired, suspended, placed under investigation or disciplined by employers for comments about Kirk’s . . . assassination.”86 And when the attorney general threatens to use the Justice Department’s power to “absolutely target you” for hate speech, why risk possible prosecution by the federal government? In short, the administration’s response to Kirk’s death is highly problematic because of its chilling effect on free expression and its discrimination against viewpoints the administration disdains. Viewpoint-based discrimination, after all, is forbidden under the First Amendment.87
The irony of trying to cancel Kirk’s hateful critics is deep. Greg Lukianoff, president and CEO of FIRE, explained in The New York Times that “Charlie Kirk rejected the idea of using hate speech rationales to crack down on free speech. Yet after Mr. Kirk’s assassination, Republicans rushed to promise crackdowns on hateful expression, deploying the same concept.”88 Adam Goldstein, an attorney at FIRE, asserted that
in a free society, we must not be afraid to express our views, no matter how strongly some might oppose them. That’s the point of free speech. But it is precisely for that reason why we must not respond to mockery of Kirk’s assassination by canceling everyone who offends us: because that too creates a society where people are afraid to express themselves.89 (Emphasis in original.)
Goldstein pointed out that successfully getting someone fired is neither an intellectual victory nor a triumph of one person’s views over another’s. He wrote that “we don’t win an argument by ruining someone’s life. We just ruin someone’s life.”90 Indeed, Lukianoff highlighted an even more fundamental problem with some Republicans resorting to the left’s cancel-culture tactics after Kirk’s assassination: “Using your opponents’ nastiest tools doesn’t persuade them to disarm; it inspires retaliation. Tit for tat, forever and ever.” Lukianoff suggested both sides are seemingly blind to the fact that “the weapon that you reach for today will be used against you tomorrow.”91
Those who value free expression in a democratic society can only hope the Trump administration does not repeat its response to Kirk’s critics in future scenarios. As Lukianoff rhetorically queried, “Do you want to live in the kind of country where you can have a strong opinion and a job, but not both?”92
The administration would be wise to remember the words of Justice Samuel Alito, one of the Court’s most conservative members, from a 2017 case in which the government expressed “an interest in preventing speech expressing ideas that offend.” Alito reasoned for the Court that the government’s interest “strikes at the heart of the First Amendment. Speech that demeans on the basis of race, ethnicity, gender, religion, age, disability, or any other similar ground is hateful; but the proudest boast of our free speech jurisprudence is that we protect the freedom to express ‘the thought that we hate.’”93
Abiding by Justice Alito’s wise words going forward will help the Trump administration bring back free speech for all Americans, not just for those who support the president and embrace MAGA’s heroes.
Using the justifications of targeting domestic terrorism, rooting out political violence, and preventing the doxing of ICE agents,94 the Trump administration broadly monitors online speech that criticizes government efforts targeting illegal immigration, and it employs administrative subpoenas to discover the identity of anonymous online critics. These tactics can rightfully ferret out speech that is unlawful because it is integral to criminal conduct or constitutes a true threat of violence.95 However, the dragnet efforts can sweep up dissenting political expression that’s fully protected by the First Amendment and, in so doing, produce a chilling effect on such content for people who fear government reprisal because their views are antithetical to Trump’s.96
A March 2026 post published by the Knight First Amendment Institute at Columbia University asserts that
the use of social media to target dissenters and opponents has soared since January 2025. President Trump and high-ranking officials have instituted an almost breathtaking set of executive orders, policies, directives, and law and immigration enforcement actions explicitly designed to evaluate, punish, detain, and deport people on the basis of their speech on social media.97
According to an October 2025 lawsuit filed by five labor unions against several federal government departments and officials, “the government has developed and is deploying a vast surveillance apparatus . . . to undertake viewpoint-based surveillance of the social media and online expressive activity of noncitizens lawfully present in the United States.”98 As noted earlier in this report, a federal judge ruled in 2025 that noncitizens who lawfully reside in the US are protected by the First Amendment.99
When the government cannot determine who its online critics are, it sometimes uses administrative subpoenas to find out.100 In February 2026, the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) of Northern California and the Electronic Frontier Foundation published an open letter to Amazon, Apple, Discord, Google, Meta, Microsoft, Reddit, and other companies that might “be receiving subpoenas and other requests for user data from the Department of Homeland Security’s . . . immigration components.”101 Among other things, the letter asserts that
the Trump Administration is aggressively targeting social media users engaged in First Amendment activity. We have seen multiple examples of this first-hand. On September 3, 2025, DHS issued a subpoena to Meta seeking to unmask the identities of users who documented immigration raids in California. DHS issued a similar summons to Meta on September 25, 2025, related to action in Pennsylvania. The government withdrew its demands after the users—represented by the ACLU affiliates of Northern California and Pennsylvania—challenged them. In October 2025, DHS sent Google a subpoena demanding information about a retiree who criticized the agency’s policies; in a shocking turn, federal agents later appeared on that person’s doorstep.102
The letter explains that the September 3, 2025, subpoena of Meta is “facially unconstitutional” because it fails to demonstrate “a substantial relation between the information sought and a subject of overriding and compelling state interest.” The letter asserts that “subpoenas that provide no facts—aside from a bare mention of ‘Officer safety/doxing’—fail that required showing.” The ACLU of Northern California and the Electronic Frontier Foundation “call on companies in receipt of such subpoenas to insist that DHS seek court confirmation that their demands are not unlawful or unconstitutional prior to companies disclosing any user information.” They also urge the companies “to notify users about demands for their information with meaningful time to challenge subpoenas on their own.”103
In sum, flushing out terrorists and arresting suspected criminals are noble objectives, but the Trump administration is casting an extremely wide net to catch them. That net captures a wide array of speech safeguarded by the First Amendment and deters others who fear prosecution from engaging in it. If President Trump wants to deliver on his promise to “bring back free speech to America,”104 his administration should rein in its surveillance and unmasking efforts, using them in a more narrow and precise fashion.
A fifth troubling practice the Trump administration has engaged in that affects online expression involves trampling on people’s unenumerated First Amendment right to be free from government-compelled speech. This constitutional right to remain silent is the flip side of the right to speak, and it is a well-established principle.105
For instance, Justice Neil Gorsuch observed for the Supreme Court in 2023 that the government generally “may not compel a person to speak its own preferred messages.” Gorsuch cited numerous decisions supporting that proposition.106 Five years earlier, Justice Alito explained that “compelling individuals to mouth support for views they find objectionable violates [a] cardinal constitutional command.”107 That principle was first articulated in 1943 by Justice Robert Jackson in West Virginia State Board of Education v. Barnette, which addressed the compelled flag salute and pledge of allegiance.108 Jackson wrote for the Barnette majority that “if there is any fixed star in our constitutional constellation, it is that no official, high or petty, can prescribe what shall be orthodox in politics, nationalism, religion, or other matters of opinion or force citizens to confess by word or act their faith therein.”109 (Emphasis added.)
Whether blissfully unaware of this principle or just audaciously choosing to ignore it, the US Department of Education breached it during the record-setting government shutdown of 2025.110 That was US District Judge Cooper’s conclusion in his November 2025 opinion in American Federation of Government Employees.111
American Federation of Government Employees centers on the Department of Education compelling furloughed employees—without their permission—to blame Senate Democrats for the shutdown. As Cooper summarized, the Department instructed employees before the shutdown to create
an automated out-of-office e-mail message. The Department supplied a template containing factual, nonpartisan language. But shortly after the furloughed employees followed these instructions and lost access to their e-mail accounts, the Department changed the messages without the employees’ knowledge or consent. The new auto-reply, standardized for all furloughed employees, states that the lapse in appropriations was caused by “Democrat Senators” who were blocking the passage of a “clean” continuing resolution.112
Cooper determined the OOO email takeover violated the employees’ constitutional right against compelled expression. Underlying his decision was the doctrine of public-employee speech rights,113 with Cooper writing that “when government employees enter public service, they do not sign away their First Amendment rights, and they certainly do not sign up to be a billboard for any given administration’s partisan views.”114 He reasoned that recipients of the furloughed employees’ OOO reply emails “might reasonably believe that the named employee authored the message, or at least endorsed the message by declining to change it. After all, common experience teaches that individual employees typically draft their own out-of-office responses and are not forced to include specific language dictated by their employers.”115
In short, the employees likely would be closely associated with the OOO replies they sent, with recipients believing the blame-the-Democrats statement tracked the employees’ personal views. Public employees, however, possess a significant interest in not being compelled to convey the department’s partisan political message because, as Cooper explained, “nonpartisanship is the bedrock of the federal civil service; it ensures that career government employees serve the public, not the politicians.”116
Conversely, Cooper concluded that “the government has failed to identify, let alone substantiate, any legitimate interest whatsoever in using its rank-and-file employees’ e-mail accounts to promulgate partisan political statements.”117 In other words, in balancing government employees’ interest in not speaking out against the department’s interest in compelling them to do so, the employees’ interest far outweighed the government’s. Cooper therefore concluded the “department violated the First Amendment rights of its employees who have been furloughed or placed on administrative leave”118 by “unlawfully compelling its employees’ speech.”119
This didn’t mean, however, that the Trump administration could not—on its own—blame Democrats for the shutdown. It simply meant the administration could not hijack others’ speech to do so. As Cooper wrote, “Political officials are free to blame whomever they wish for the shutdown, but they cannot use rank-and-file civil servants as their unwilling spokespeople. The First Amendment stands in their way.”120
Hopefully, other Trump administration leaders, departments, and agencies now have learned this crucial free speech lesson and won’t repeat the Department of Education’s constitutional blunder. Replicating it would betray the president’s vow to “bring back free speech to America.”121
This report illustrated a yawning gap between rhetoric and reality regarding online free expression during approximately the first year of Trump’s second term as president. It identified five government practices—alleged or demonstrated—that undercut Trump’s noble inaugural-day pledge and related EO to end government censorship and restore free speech in the United States. This report concentrated only on online expression.
With more than two and a half years remaining in his second presidential term, Trump still has time to make good on his free speech promises as they affect online expression. Doing so, however, will require significantly rolling back—or even better, completely jettisoning—the tactics this report addressed.
The Trump administration’s alleged unlawful jawboning in Aaron and Rosado suggests—if proved in court—that the president is a free speech hypocrite. Trump rightfully lambasted the Biden administration’s jawboning in EO 14149, but since then, he allegedly has let his administration deploy the same tactic to silence constitutional speech about ICE. Vance’s and Bondi’s initial statements following Kirk’s assassination illustrate open hostility toward offensive views that don’t square with the administration’s perspective and the concomitant embrace of a cancel-culture mentality typically associated with liberals.
Regrettably, these and other practices described above indicate the Trump administration’s support for free speech is decidedly viewpoint based, embodying a “free speech for me—but not for thee” mentality.122 To wit, the FTC’s regulatory power—deployed, threatened, or suggested in warning letters and CIDs—is leveraged only to rectify online liberal bias where it supposedly exists. The administration’s desire to control online narratives has gone so far as commandeering furloughed government employees’ OOO email responses to blame Democrats for the 2025 government shutdown.
Ultimately, when the nation now is so deeply polarized, safeguarding online free expression in an equally polarized—not viewpoint-neutral—manner doesn’t improve matters or promote democracy. It promotes only the side that temporarily holds power. That, in turn, would be a sad free speech legacy for Trump.
Clay Calvert is a nonresident senior fellow in technology policy studies at the American Enterprise Institute. He is also a professor emeritus of law at the Levin College of Law and Brechner Eminent Scholar Emeritus at the College of Journalism and Communications, both at the University of Florida.
The First Amendment to the US Constitution provides, in relevant part, that “Congress shall make no law … abridging the freedom of speech, or of the press.” US Const. amend. I. The free speech and free press clauses were incorporated 101 years ago through the 14th Amendment’s due process clause as fundamental liberties applicable to state and local government entities and officials. Gitlow v. New York, 268 U.S. 652, 666 (1925).
Donald J. Trump, “The Inaugural Address,” speech, US Capitol, Washinton, DC, January 20, 2025, https://www.whitehouse.gov/remarks/2025/01/the-inaugural-address/.
Exec. Order No. 14149, 90 Fed. Reg. 8243 (January 28, 2025).
Scott A. Leadingham, a staff writer for Freedom Forum, calls jawboning “a term for when the government pressures a private company or person to restrict another company or person’s First Amendment freedoms, rather than the government doing the restricting itself.” See Scott A. Leadingham, “Jawboning: What Is It, and Does It Violate the First Amendment?,” Freedom Forum, February 19, 2026, https://www.freedomforum.org/jawboning/.
For a primer on jawboning, see Clay Calvert, “Understanding the Muddled Law of Jawboning in Missouri v. Biden,” AEIdeas, August 9, 2023, https://www.aei.org/technology-and-innovation/understanding-the-muddled-law-of-jawboning-in-missouri-v-biden/.
National Rifle Association of America v. Vullo, 602 U.S. 175, 180 (2024).
Vullo, 602 U.S. at 188.
Vullo, 602 U.S. at 191.
The majority found that none of the “plaintiffs [had] established standing to seek an injunction against any defendant,” and thus the Court “lack[ed] jurisdiction to reach the merits of the dispute.” Murthy v. Missouri, 603 U.S. 43, 56 (2024).
Exec. Order No. 14149, 90 Fed. Reg. 8243 (January 28, 2025).
Sean Stevens, “Americans Continue to Say Free Speech Is in Decline,” Expression, February 11, 2026, https://expression.fire.org/p/poll-americans-continue-to-say-free.
Trump, “The Inaugural Address.”
Exec. Order No. 14149, 90 Fed. Reg. 8243 (January 28, 2025).
Exec. Order No. 14149, 90 Fed. Reg. 8243 (January 28, 2025).
I have observed that “the mere possibility of speech producing myriad negative consequences—legal sanctions, job loss, social ostracization, or violence—may chill (deter and discourage) people from exercising First Amendment rights. Rather than risk the perils and penalties, they self-censor.” See Clay Calvert, “Fear of Speaking Out Online: Data and Contentions About Self-Censorship,” AEIdeas, October 22, 2025, https://www.aei.org/technology-and-innovation/fear-of-speaking-out-online-data-and-contentions-about-self-censorship/.
Trump, “The Inaugural Address.”
Complaint, Aaron v. Bondi, No. 1:25-cv-04250 (D.D.C. December 8, 2025); and Complaint, Rosado v. Bondi, No. 1:26-cv-01532 (N.D. Ill. February 11, 2026). An amended complaint was filed in Aaron in March 2026. Amended Complaint, Aaron v. Bondi, No. 1:25-cv-04250 (D.D.C. March 16, 2026).
Plaintiffs’ Memorandum of Law in Support of Motion for Preliminary Injunction at 7–8, Rosado v. Bondi, No. 1:26-cv-01532 (N.D. Ill. Feb. 26, 2026).
Complaint for Declaratory and Injunctive Relief at 2, NewsGuard Technologies v. Federal Trade Commission, No. 1:26-cv-00353 (D.D.C. Feb. 6, 2026).
NewsGuard, “News Reliability Ratings,” https://www.newsguardtech.com/solutions/news-reliability-ratings/.
Complaint for Declaratory and Injunctive Relief at 16, NewsGuard Technologies, No. 1:26-cv-00353.
Complaint for Declaratory and Injunctive Relief at 2, NewsGuard Technologies, No. 1:26-cv-00353.
Complaint for Declaratory and Injunctive Relief at 12, NewsGuard Technologies, No. 1:26-cv-00353.
Defendants’ Opposition to Plaintiff’s Motion for Preliminary Injunction at 7, NewsGuard Technologies, No. 1:26-cv-00353.
Defendants’ Opposition to Plaintiff’s Motion for Preliminary Injunction at 8, NewsGuard Technologies, No. 1:26-cv-00353.
Defendants’ Opposition to Plaintiff’s Motion for Preliminary Injunction at 9, NewsGuard Technologies, No. 1:26-cv-00353.
Martin Kaste, “Free Speech Lawsuits Mount After Charlie Kirk Assassination,” National Public Radio, February 12, 2026, https://www.npr.org/2026/02/12/nx-s1-5667213/free-speech-lawsuits-since-kirk-killing.
The Trump administration’s effort to silence hateful speech about Kirk is exemplified by US Attorney General Bondi’s public proclamations after Kirk’s assassination. To review Bondi’s quotes and for an explanation that hate speech generally is protected by the First Amendment, see Clay Calvert, “Online Hate Speech, Threats, and Incitement: Understanding Key Differences After Bondi’s Blunder,” AEIdeas, November 4, 2025, https://www.aei.org/technology-and-innovation/online-hate-speech-threats-and-incitement-understanding-key-differences-after-bondis-blunder/.
Sheera Frenkel and Mike Isaac, “Homeland Security Wants Social Media Sites to Expose Anti-ICE Accounts,” The New York Times, February 13, 2026, https://www.nytimes.com/2026/02/13/technology/dhs-anti-ice-social-media.html.
The ACLU of Northern California declared it “a victory for free speech online” when DHS withdrew “a subpoena to Meta demanding the identities of multiple anonymous Instagram accounts that posted about ICE raids in Los Angeles.” See American Civil Liberties Union of Northern California, “DHS Withdraws Subpoena Seeking to Unmask Instagram Users Who Posted About ICE Raids,” press release, November 25, 2025, https://www.aclunorcal.org/press-releases/dhs-withdraws-subpoena-seeking-unmask-instagram-users-who-posted-about-ice-raids/.
Sheera Frenkel and Aaron Krolik, “How ICE Already Knows Who Minneapolis Protesters Are,” The New York Times, January 30, 2026, https://www.nytimes.com/2026/01/30/technology/tech-ice-facial-recognition-palantir.html.
The Brennan Center for Justice and the Knight First Amendment Institute argue that “a broad and diverse coalition of organizations have repeatedly opposed the federal government’s collection and screening of social media information on a number of grounds, including the chilling of free expression and association.” See New York University Law School, Brennan Center for Justice, and Columbia University, Knight First Amendment Institute, “Re: ‘Agency Information Collection Activities; New Collection: Generic Clearance for the Collection of Social Media Identifier(s) on Immigration Forms [OMB Control Number 1615-NEW, Docket ID USCIS-2025-0003],’” May 5, 2025, 3, https://www.brennancenter.org/media/13951/download/05.05.25-bcj-uscis-smm-comments.pdf?inline=1.
The Supreme Court has determined that “there is practically universal agreement that a major purpose of that Amendment was to protect the free discussion of governmental affairs,” including “the manner in which government is operated or should be operated.” See Mills v. Alabama, 384 U.S. 214, 218 (1966).
American Association of University Professors v. Rubio, 802 F. Supp. 3d 120, 131 (D. Mass. 2025).
Clay Calvert, “First Amendment Lessons from the Shutdown About Government-Compelled Political Expression,” AEIdeas, January 8, 2026, https://www.aei.org/technology-and-innovation/first-amendment-lessons-from-the-shutdown-about-government-compelled-political-expression/.
American Federation of Government Employees v. US Department of Education, 2025 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 220612, at *2 (D.D.C. Nov. 7, 2025).
Cooper concluded that the government infringed on the employees’ First Amendment “rights by unlawfully compelling [their] speech.” See American Federation of Government Employees, 2025 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 220612, at *48.
This report concentrates only on online expression. It does not, for instance, examine over-the-air broadcasters’ speech rights during President Trump’s first year back in the Oval Office. See Clay Calvert, “The Public Interest as a Political Tool,” AEIdeas, March 19, 2025, https://www.aei.org/technology-and-innovation/the-public-interest-as-a-political-tool/. It also doesn’t review matters from President Trump’s personal lawsuits against members of the press, such as his suing The Wall Street Journal for defamation. Complaint, Trump v. Dow Jones & Company, No. 1:25-cv-23232 (S.D. Fla. July 18, 2025).
Complaint at 1, Aaron, No. 1:25-cv-04250.
Complaint at 2, 4, Rosado, No. 1:26-cv-01532.
Complaint at 2, Rosado, No. 1:26-cv-01532.
Complaint at 3, Rosado, No. 1:26-cv-01532.
Complaint at 5, Rosado, No. 1:26-cv-01532.
Gene Policinski, a senior fellow for the First Amendment at Freedom Forum, observes that “courts have recognized that First Amendment rights generally protect people when recording law enforcement who are on duty and in a public area—in photos, video or audio.” He adds that “this right is protected under both freedom of speech as free expression and freedom of the press, which includes protection for gathering information about the government and for sharing it with others.” See Gene Policinski, “Recording Law Enforcement: First Amendment Right or Arrestable Offense?,” Freedom Forum, January 14, 2026, https://www.freedomforum.org/recording-law-enforcement/.
Walter Olson, “DHS Says Videotaping ICE Agents Is Illegal. Federal Courts Disagree.,” Cato Institute, October 9, 2025, https://www.cato.org/commentary/dhs-says-videotaping-ice-agents-illegal-federal-courts-disagree.
Nicodemus v. City of South Bend, 137 F.4th 654, 664 (7th Cir. 2025).
Kurt Streeter, “How Alex Pretti’s Death Became a National Tipping Point,” The New York Times, February 1, 2026, https://www.nytimes.com/2026/02/01/us/alex-pretti-minneapolis.html.
Nicodemus, 137 F.4th at 663.
Vullo, 602 U.S. at 191.
Vullo, 602 U.S. at 188.
Trump, “The Inaugural Address.”
Unfair Methods of Competition Unlawful; Prevention by Commission, 15 U.S.C. § 45(a)(1) (2026).
Moody v. NetChoice, 603 U.S. 707, 741–42 (2024).
Manhattan Community Access Corp. v. Halleck, 587 U.S. 802, 808 (2019).
Federal Trade Commission, “Request for Public Comments Regarding Technology Platform Censorship,” February 19, 2025, https://www.ftc.gov/policy/public-comments/request-public-comments-regarding-technology-platform-censorship.
Clay Calvert, First Amendment Problems with Using Antitrust Law Against Social Media Platforms’ Content Decisions, American Enterprise Institute, October 15, 2025, 10, https://www.aei.org/research-products/report/first-amendment-problems-with-using-antitrust-law-against-social-media-platforms-content-decisions/.
Moody, 603 U.S. at 718.
Moody, 603 U.S. at 717.
Moody, 603 U.S. at 719.
For example, Ferguson wrote to Alphabet CEO Sundar Pichai in August 2025, citing “recent reporting that suggests Alphabet’s administration of Gmail is designed to have partisan effects” and notifying Pichai “that Alphabet may be engaging in unfair or deceptive acts or practices” if that is the case. Ferguson expresses his understanding “that Gmail’s spam filters routinely block messages from reaching consumers when those messages come from Republican senders but fail to block similar messages sent by Democrats.” Andrew N. Ferguson, email to Sundar Pichai, “Re: Potential FTC Act Violations Related to Partisan Administration of Gmail,” August 28, 2025, 1, https://www.ftc.gov/system/files/ftc_gov/pdf/ferguson-letter-alphabet-ceo-re-potential-ftc-act-violations-related-to-partisan-administration-of-gmail.pdf. In other words, Ferguson is concerned with correcting a company’s purported bias against conservative viewpoints.
Complaint for Declaratory and Injunctive Relief, NewsGuard Technologies, No. 1:26-cv-00353.
Petition to Quash Civil Investigative Demand to NewsGuard dated May 20, 2025, 72 (Fed. Trade Comm’n, Jan. 16, 2026), https://www.ftc.gov/system/files/ftc_gov/pdf/NewsGuard-PTQ.pdf.
Defendants’ Opposition to Plaintiff’s Motion for Preliminary Injunction at 7, NewsGuard Technologies, No. 1:26-cv-00353.
Editorial Board, “FTC Must Keep Up the Fight Against NewsGuard and Its ‘Disinformation’ Graft,” New York Post, February 17, 2026, https://nypost.com/2026/02/17/opinion/ftc-must-keep-up-the-fight-against-newsguard-and-its-disinformation-graft/.
Editorial Board, “NewsGuard Punches Back at the FTC,” The Wall Street Journal, February 12, 2026, https://www.wsj.com/opinion/newsguard-lawsuit-ftc-antitrust-newsmax-andrew-ferguson-efe42110.
Charles Sauer, “Sorry FTC, the First Amendment Trumps Antitrust Law,” RealClearMarkets, February 25, 2026, https://www.realclearmarkets.com/articles/2026/02/25/sorry_ftc_the_first_amendment_trumps_antitrust_law_1166862.html.
Foundation for Individual Rights and Expression, “Lawsuit: FIRE Sues Federal Trade Commission over Agency’s Targeting of News Rating Service,” press release, February 6, 2026, https://www.fire.org/news/lawsuit-fire-sues-federal-trade-commission-over-agencys-targeting-news-rating-service.
Media Matters for America v. Federal Trade Commission, 2025 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 158964, *3 (D.D.C. Aug. 15, 2025).
Media Matters for America, 2025 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 158964, at *5–6.
Federal Trade Commission, “Federal Trade Commission Chairman Andrew N. Ferguson Issues Warning Letter to Apple CEO Tim Cook,” press release, February 12, 2026, https://www.ftc.gov/news-events/news/press-releases/2026/02/federal-trade-commission-chairman-andrew-n-ferguson-issues-warning-letter-apple-ceo-tim-cook.
Media Research Center, “About,” https://mrcfreespeechamerica.org/about.
Andrew N. Ferguson, email to Timothy Cook, “Re: Potential FTC Act Violations Related to Suppressing or Promoting Featured News Articles for Political Reasons,” 2–3, https://www.ftc.gov/system/files/ftc_gov/pdf/apple-news-warning-letter.pdf.
David Inserra, “FTC Continues to Confuse Free Expression and Censorship as It Threatens Apple News,” Cato at Liberty, February 13, 2026, https://www.cato.org/blog/ftc-continues-confuse-free-expression-censorship-it-threatens-apple-news.
Editorial Board, “Legally Creative, Democratically Dangerous: Trump’s Plan to Twist the News,” The New York Times, February 24, 2026, https://www.nytimes.com/2026/02/24/opinion/fcc-ftc-free-speech-trump.html.
The New York Times reported that Carr “has argued . . . that he has been a consistent champion of the First Amendment and said he was helping protect free speech by weighing in on local TV programming decisions that no longer serve the public interest.” See Cecilia Kang, “Brendan Carr Plans to Keep Going After the Media,” The New York Times, September 24, 2025, https://www.nytimes.com/2025/09/24/technology/brendan-carr-fcc-kimmel.html.
Clay Calvert, “First Amendment Problems with Removing Bias in Speech Marketplaces via Government Intervention,” AEIdeas, September 3, 2025, https://www.aei.org/technology-and-innovation/first-amendment-problems-with-removing-bias-in-speech-marketplaces-via-government-intervention/.
Regarding the FCC and its attacks on media bias, Napoli writes that “media bias claims are . . . central to the Federal Communications Commission’s threatened regulatory actions against broadcasters for the political content of programs such as Jimmy Kimmel Live, the Late Show with Stephen Colbert, and The View.” Philip M. Napoli, “Considering the Federal Trade Commission’s Double Standard on Media Bias,” Tech Policy Press, February 24, 2026, https://www.techpolicy.press/considering-the-federal-trade-commissions-double-standard-on-media-bias/.
Napoli, “Considering the Federal Trade Commission’s Double Standard on Media Bias.”
Trump, “The Inaugural Address.”
Kaste, “Free Speech Lawsuits Mount After Charlie Kirk Assassination.” See also Bryan Metzger, “JD Vance Says If You See Someone Celebrating Charlie Kirk’s Death, Tell Their Employer,” Business Insider, September 15, 2025, https://www.businessinsider.com/jd-vance-charlie-kirk-death-celebration-call-employers-2025-9.
Pamela Bondi and Katie Miller, The Katie Miller Podcast, podcast, “Attorney General Pam Bondi Reacts to the Death of Charlie Kirk,” YouTube, September 15, 2025, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4LRPHxSrLTE; and CNN, “Bondi: ‘We Will Absolutely Target You’ over Hate Speech,” YouTube, September 16, 2025, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VGvt1Qh2gh0.
Bondi and Miller, “Attorney General Pam Bondi Reacts to the Death of Charlie Kirk.”
I have noted elsewhere that “hateful epithets are unprotected only when used within the narrow context of a category of expression the Court already has carved out from constitutional shelter, such as fighting words, true threats and incitement to unlawful action or violence.” (Emphasis in original.) See Clay Calvert, “Legislating Transparency or Unconstitutional, Government-Coerced Social Media Censorship,” AEIdeas, September 19, 2023, https://www.aei.org/technology-and-innovation/legislating-transparency-or-unconstitutional-government-coerced-social-media-censorship/.
Pamela Bondi (@AGPamBondi), “Hate speech that crosses the line into threats of violence is NOT protected by the First Amendment. It’s a crime.,” X, September 16, 2025, 7:26 a.m., https://x.com/AGPamBondi/status/1967913066554630181.
Thomas A. Berry, “Pam Bondi Had to Walk Back Her ‘Hate Speech’ Comments—for Good Reason,” Cato Institute, September 17, 2025, https://www.cato.org/commentary/pam-bondi-had-walk-back-her-hate-speech-comments-good-reason.
Raphael Satter and A. J. Vicens, “The Charlie Kirk Purge: How 600 Americans Were Punished in a Pro-Trump Crackdown,” Reuters, November 19, 2025, https://www.reuters.com/investigations/charlie-kirk-purge-how-600-americans-were-punished-pro-trump-crackdown-2025-11-19/.
In an earlier case, Justice Anthony Kennedy called “viewpoint discrimination . . . an egregious form of content discrimination. The government must abstain from regulating speech when the specific motivating ideology or the opinion or perspective of the speaker is the rationale for the restriction.” See Rosenberger v. Rector and Visitors of University of Virginia, 515 U.S. 819, 829 (1995).
Greg Lukianoff, “Everyone’s a Free-Speech Hypocrite,” The New York Times, September 23, 2025, https://www.nytimes.com/2025/09/23/opinion/consequence-culture-kimmel-kirk.html.
Adam Goldstein, “We Are in the Cancel Culture Part of the Tragedy Cycle,” Foundation for Individual Rights and Expression, September 12, 2025, https://www.fire.org/news/we-are-cancel-culture-part-tragedy-cycle.
Goldstein, “We Are in the Cancel Culture Part of the Tragedy Cycle.”
Lukianoff, “Everyone’s a Free-Speech Hypocrite.”
Angele Latham et al., “Free Speech Is Facing Threats in the US and Beyond. Here Are the Pressure Points,” USA Today, October 8, 2025, https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/nation/2025/10/08/free-speech-first-amendment-cancel-culture/86521457007/.
Matal v. Tam, 582 U.S. 218, 246 (2017).
Donald J. Trump, “Countering Domestic Terrorism and Organized Political Violence,” White House, September 25, 2025, https://www.whitehouse.gov/presidential-actions/2025/09/countering-domestic-terrorism-and-organized-political-violence/; and US Department of Homeland Security, “8000% Increase in Death Threats Against ICE Law Enforcement as They Risk Their Lives to Remove the Worst of the Worst,” press release, October 30, 2025, https://www.dhs.gov/news/2025/10/30/8000-increase-death-threats-against-ice-law-enforcement-they-risk-their-lives.
Justice Amy Coney Barrett recently explained for the Court that “speech intended to bring about a particular unlawful act has no social value; therefore, it is unprotected.” United States v. Hansen, 599 U.S. 762, 783 (2023). Justice Kagan has observed that “true threats of violence are outside the bounds of First Amendment protection and punishable as crimes.” Counterman v. Colorado, 600 U.S. 66, 69 (2023).
The Washington Post reported that the Trump administration’s “expansive effort to root out what it sees as rampant left-wing domestic terrorism” may signal “an impending crackdown on political dissent under the banner of counterterrorism—one that could land large numbers of liberal activists on government watch lists and chill Americans’ First Amendment right to protest the administration’s policies.”) See Eva Dou et al., “Trump Administration Prepares Sweeping Crackdown on Leftist Networks,” The Washington Post, December 18, 2025, https://www.washingtonpost.com/technology/2025/12/18/justice-department-fbi-first-amendment-antifa/.
Rachel Levinson-Waldman, “Ending the Social Media Surveillance Loophole,” Columbia University, Knight First Amendment Institute, March 2, 2026, https://knightcolumbia.org/blog/ending-the-social-media-surveillance-loophole.
Complaint at 2, International Union v. US Department of State, No. 1:25-cv-08566 (S.D.N.Y. Oct. 16, 2025).
American Association of University Professors, 802 F. Supp. 3d at 131.
Zack Whittaker reported that “the Department of Homeland Security has been quietly demanding tech companies turn over user information about critics of the Trump administration” and that DHS “has relied on the use of administrative subpoenas to seek identifiable information about individuals who run anonymous Instagram accounts, which share posts about ICE immigration raids in their local neighborhoods.” See Zack Whittaker, “Homeland Security Is Trying to Force Tech Companies to Hand Over Data About Trump Critics,” TechCrunch, February 3, 2026, https://techcrunch.com/2026/02/03/homeland-security-is-trying-to-force-tech-companies-to-hand-over-data-about-trump-critics/.
American Civil Liberties Union of Northern California and Electronic Frontier Foundation, “Open Letter: Tech Companies Must Resist Unlawful Subpoenas for User Data,” February 5, 2026, 1, https://www.eff.org/document/open-letter-tech-companies-must-resist-unlawful-subpoenas-user-data.
American Civil Liberties Union of Northern California and Electronic Frontier Foundation, “Open Letter,” 1.
American Civil Liberties Union of Northern California and Electronic Frontier Foundation, “Open Letter,” 3, 2.
Trump, “The Inaugural Address.”
Chief Justice John Roberts observed in 2006 that “some of this Court’s leading First Amendment precedents have established the principle that freedom of speech prohibits the government from telling people what they must say.” See Rumsfeld v. Forum for Academic and Institutional Rights, 547 U.S. 47, 61 (2006).
303 Creative v. Elenis, 600 U.S. 570, 586 (2023).
Janus v. American Federation of State, County, and Municipal Employees, 585 U.S. 878, 892 (2018).
West Virginia State Board of Education v. Barnette, 319 U.S. 624 (1943).
Barnette, 319 U.S. at 642.
See Luke Broadwater, “Shutdown Becomes Longest in History, as Trump Officials Threaten Pain Could Worsen,” The New York Times, November 4, 2025, https://www.nytimes.com/2025/11/04/us/politics/trump-administration-pain-shutdown.html.
American Federation of Government Employees, 2025 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 220612.
American Federation of Government Employees, 2025 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 220612, at *1–2.
For an overview of “the public-employee speech rights doctrine established by the US Supreme Court in a series of opinions highlighted by Pickering v. Board of Education (1968), Connick v. Myers (1983), Garcetti v. Ceballos (2006), and Lane v. Franks (2014),” see Clay Calvert, “Lessons from a Tragedy: Public School Teachers’ Online Speech Rights Aren’t Absolute and That’s a Good Thing,” AEIdeas, September 16, 2025, https://www.aei.org/technology-and-innovation/lessons-from-a-tragedy-public-school-teachers-online-speech-rights-arent-absolute-and-thats-a-good-thing/.
American Federation of Government Employees, 2025 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 220612, at *31.
American Federation of Government Employees, 2025 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 220612, at *34.
American Federation of Government Employees, 2025 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 220612, at *2–3. The principle of government employee nonpartisanship is partly grounded in the Hatch Act, which “generally prohibits federal employees from engaging in partisan political activity while on duty, in a federal facility, or using federal property.” It also defines political activity “as any activity directed toward the success or failure of a political party, candidate for partisan political office, or partisan political group.” See US Department of Justice, Justice Management Division, Departmental Ethics Office, “Fact Sheet: Political Activity and the Hatch Act,” January 2024, https://www.justice.gov/jmd/media/1359501/dl.
American Federation of Government Employees, 2025 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 220612, at *45.
American Federation of Government Employees, 2025 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 220612, at *48.
American Federation of Government Employees, 2025 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 220612, at *48.
American Federation of Government Employees, 2025 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 220612, at *3.
Trump, “The Inaugural Address.”
Nat Hentoff, Free Speech for Me—but Not for Thee: How the American Left and Right Relentlessly Censor Each Other (HarperCollins, 1992).
